Chapter 27

Maybe if she heard the larks sing she'd write. 玛丽听到云雀的歌声也许会写信的。 来自名作英译部分
But sure there are no larks in big cities. 可大城市里哪有云雀呢。” 来自名作英译部分
2 worthy
adj.(of)值得的，配得上的；有价值的

参考例句：

I did not esteem him to be worthy of trust.我认为他不值得信赖。
There occurred nothing that was worthy to be mentioned.没有值得一提的事发生。
3 disturbance
n.动乱，骚动；打扰，干扰；(身心)失调

参考例句：

He is suffering an emotional disturbance.他的情绪受到了困扰。
You can work in here without any disturbance.在这儿你可不受任何干扰地工作。
4 mortification
n.耻辱，屈辱

参考例句：

To my mortification, my manuscript was rejected. 使我感到失面子的是：我的稿件被退了回来。
The chairman tried to disguise his mortification. 主席试图掩饰自己的窘迫。
5 incongruity
n.不协调，不一致

参考例句：

She smiled at the incongruity of the question.面对这样突兀的问题，她笑了。
When the particular outstrips the general,we are faced with an incongruity.当特别是超过了总的来讲，我们正面临着一个不协调。
6 reassurance
n.使放心，使消除疑虑

参考例句：

He drew reassurance from the enthusiastic applause.热烈的掌声使他获得了信心。
Reassurance is especially critical when it comes to military activities.消除疑虑在军事活动方面尤为关键。
7 chambers
n.房间( chamber的名词复数 )；（议会的）议院；卧室；会议厅

参考例句：

The body will be removed into one of the cold storage chambers. 尸体将被移到一个冷冻间里。 来自《简明英汉词典》
Mr Chambers's readable book concentrates on the middle passage: the time Ransome spent in Russia. Chambers先生的这本值得一看的书重点在中间：Ransome在俄国的那几年。 来自互联网
8 wrestles
v.（与某人）搏斗( wrestle的第三人称单数 )；扭成一团；扭打；（与…）摔跤

参考例句：

The book also wrestles with the idea of individualism. 书中也与个人英雄主义的观念进行搏斗。 来自互联网
He that wrestles with us strengthens our nerves and sharpens our skill. 和我们搏斗的人锻炼了我们的勇气，磨练了我们的技能。 来自互联网
9 bondage
n.奴役，束缚

参考例句：

Masters sometimes allowed their slaves to buy their way out of bondage.奴隶主们有时允许奴隶为自己赎身。
They aim to deliver the people who are in bondage to superstitious belief.他们的目的在于解脱那些受迷信束缚的人。
10 cravat
n.领巾，领结；v.使穿有领结的服装，使结领结

参考例句：

You're never fully dressed without a cravat.不打领结，就不算正装。
Mr. Kenge adjusting his cravat,then looked at us.肯吉先生整了整领带，然后又望着我们。
11 avenging
adj.报仇的，复仇的v.为…复仇，报…之仇( avenge的现在分词 )；为…报复

参考例句：

He has devoted the past five years to avenging his daughter's death. 他过去5年一心报丧女之仇。 来自辞典例句
His disfigured face was like some avenging nemesis of gargoyle design. 他那张破了相的脸，活象面目狰狞的复仇之神。 来自辞典例句
12 phantom
n.幻影，虚位，幽灵；adj.错觉的，幻影的，幽灵的

参考例句：

I found myself staring at her as if she were a phantom.我发现自己瞪大眼睛看着她，好像她是一个幽灵。
He is only a phantom of a king.他只是有名无实的国王。
13 drizzly
a.毛毛雨的(a drizzly day)

参考例句：

This section of the country is drizzly in the winter. 该国的这一地区在冬天经常细雨蒙蒙。
That region is drizzly in winter. 那个地区冬天常下小雨。
14 concealed
a.隐藏的，隐蔽的

参考例句：

The paintings were concealed beneath a thick layer of plaster. 那些画被隐藏在厚厚的灰泥层下面。
I think he had a gun concealed about his person. 我认为他当时身上藏有一支枪。
15 avenger
n. 复仇者

参考例句：

"Tom Sawyer, the Black Avenger of the Spanish Main. “我乃西班牙海黑衣侠盗，汤姆 - 索亚。
Avenger's Shield-0.26 threat per hit (0.008 threat per second) 飞盾-0.26仇恨每击（0.08仇恨每秒）
16 ascent
n.(声望或地位)提高；上升，升高；登高

参考例句：

His rapid ascent in the social scale was surprising.他的社会地位提高之迅速令人吃惊。
Burke pushed the button and the elevator began its slow ascent.伯克按动电钮，电梯开始缓慢上升。
17 fully
adv.完全地，全部地，彻底地；充分地

参考例句：

The doctor asked me to breathe in,then to breathe out fully.医生让我先吸气，然后全部呼出。
They soon became fully integrated into the local community.他们很快就完全融入了当地人的圈子。
18 standing
n.持续，地位；adj.永久的，不动的，直立的，不流动的

参考例句：

After the earthquake only a few houses were left standing.地震过后只有几幢房屋还立着。
They're standing out against any change in the law.他们坚决反对对法律做任何修改。
19 swelled
增强( swell的过去式和过去分词 )； 肿胀； （使）凸出； 充满（激情）

参考例句：

The infection swelled his hand. 由于感染，他的手肿了起来。
After the heavy rain the river swelled. 大雨过后，河水猛涨。
20 crumpled
adj. 弯扭的, 变皱的 动词crumple的过去式和过去分词形式

参考例句：

She crumpled the letter up into a ball and threw it on the fire. 她把那封信揉成一团扔进了火里。
She flattened out the crumpled letter on the desk. 她在写字台上把皱巴巴的信展平。
21 metropolitan
adj.大城市的，大都会的

参考例句：

Metropolitan buildings become taller than ever.大城市的建筑变得比以前更高。
Metropolitan residents are used to fast rhythm.大都市的居民习惯于快节奏。
22 celebrated
adj.有名的，声誉卓著的

参考例句：

He was soon one of the most celebrated young painters in England.不久他就成了英格兰最负盛名的年轻画家之一。
The celebrated violinist was mobbed by the audience.观众团团围住了这位著名的小提琴演奏家。
23 provincial
adj.省的，地方的；n．外省人，乡下人

参考例句：

City dwellers think country folk have provincial attitudes.城里人以为乡下人思想迂腐。
Two leading cadres came down from the provincial capital yesterday.昨天从省里下来了两位领导干部。
24 renown
n.声誉，名望

参考例句：

His renown has spread throughout the country.他的名声已传遍全国。
She used to be a singer of some renown.她曾是位小有名气的歌手。
25 tragic
adj.悲剧的，悲剧性的，悲惨的

参考例句：

The effect of the pollution on the beaches is absolutely tragic.污染海滩后果可悲。
Charles was a man doomed to tragic issues.查理是个注定不得善终的人。
26 bard
n.吟游诗人

参考例句：

I'll use my bard song to help you concentrate!我会用我的吟游诗人歌曲帮你集中精神！
I find him,the wandering grey bard.我发现了正在徘徊的衰老游唱诗人。
27 countenance
n.脸色，面容；面部表情；vt.支持，赞同

参考例句：

At the sight of this photograph he changed his countenance.他一看见这张照片脸色就变了。
I made a fierce countenance as if I would eat him alive.我脸色恶狠狠地，仿佛要把他活生生地吞下去。
28 confidentially
ad.秘密地，悄悄地

参考例句：

She was leaning confidentially across the table. 她神神秘秘地从桌子上靠过来。
Kao Sung-nien and Wang Ch'u-hou talked confidentially in low tones. 高松年汪处厚两人低声密谈。
29 fatten
v.使肥，变肥

参考例句：

The new feed can fatten the chicken up quickly enough for market.新饲料能使鸡长得更快，以适应市场需求。
We keep animals in pens to fatten them.我们把动物关在围栏里把它们养肥。
30 wholesome
adj.适合；卫生的；有益健康的；显示身心健康的

参考例句：

In actual fact the things I like doing are mostly wholesome.实际上我喜欢做的事大都是有助于增进身体健康的。
It is not wholesome to eat without washing your hands.不洗手吃饭是不卫生的。
31 testimony
n.证词；见证，证明

参考例句：

The testimony given by him is dubious.他所作的证据是可疑的。
He was called in to bear testimony to what the police officer said.他被传入为警官所说的话作证。
32 intervals
n.[军事]间隔( interval的名词复数 )；间隔时间；[数学]区间；（戏剧、电影或音乐会的）幕间休息

参考例句：

The forecast said there would be sunny intervals and showers. 预报间晴，有阵雨。
Meetings take place at fortnightly intervals. 每两周开一次会。
33 mingled
混合，混入( mingle的过去式和过去分词 )； 混进，与…交往[联系]

参考例句：

The sounds of laughter and singing mingled in the evening air. 笑声和歌声交织在夜空中。
The man and the woman mingled as everyone started to relax. 当大家开始放松的时候，这一男一女就开始交往了。
34 likeness
n.相像，相似（之处）

参考例句：

I think the painter has produced a very true likeness.我认为这位画家画得非常逼真。
She treasured the painted likeness of her son.她珍藏她儿子的画像。
35 expressive
adj.表现的，表达…的，富于表情的

参考例句：

Black English can be more expressive than standard English.黑人所使用的英语可能比正式英语更有表现力。
He had a mobile,expressive,animated face.他有一张多变的，富于表情的，生动活泼的脸。
36 catching
adj.易传染的，有魅力的，迷人的，接住

参考例句：

There are those who think eczema is catching.有人就是认为湿疹会传染。
Enthusiasm is very catching.热情非常富有感染力。
37 neatly
adv.整洁地，干净地，灵巧地，熟练地

参考例句：

Sailors know how to wind up a long rope neatly.水手们知道怎样把一条大绳利落地缠好。
The child's dress is neatly gathered at the neck.那孩子的衣服在领口处打着整齐的皱褶。
38 meditation
n.熟虑，（尤指宗教的）默想，沉思，（pl.）冥想录

参考例句：

This peaceful garden lends itself to meditation.这个恬静的花园适于冥想。
I'm sorry to interrupt your meditation.很抱歉，我打断了你的沉思。
39 afflicted
使受痛苦，折磨( afflict的过去式和过去分词 )

参考例句：

About 40% of the country's population is afflicted with the disease. 全国40%左右的人口患有这种疾病。
A terrible restlessness that was like to hunger afflicted Martin Eden. 一阵可怕的、跟饥饿差不多的不安情绪折磨着马丁·伊登。
40 remarkable
adj.显著的，异常的，非凡的，值得注意的

参考例句：

She has made remarkable headway in her writing skills.她在写作技巧方面有了长足进步。
These cars are remarkable for the quietness of their engines.这些汽车因发动机没有噪音而不同凡响。
41 heartily
adv.衷心地，诚恳地，十分，很

参考例句：

He ate heartily and went out to look for his horse.他痛快地吃了一顿，就出去找他的马。
The host seized my hand and shook it heartily.主人抓住我的手，热情地和我握手。
：

\"Oh, no,'she said, almost pettishly, \"I just don't feel very good.\" “哦，不是，\"她说，几乎想发火了，\"我只是觉得不大好受。” 来自英汉文学 - 嘉莉妹妹
Then he tossed the marble away pettishly, and stood cogitating. 于是他一气之下扔掉那个弹子，站在那儿沉思。 来自英汉文学 - 汤姆历险
43 utterly
adv.完全地，绝对地

参考例句：

Utterly devoted to the people,he gave his life in saving his patients.他忠于人民，把毕生精力用于挽救患者的生命。
I was utterly ravished by the way she smiled.她的微笑使我完全陶醉了。
44 preposterous
adj.荒谬的，可笑的

参考例句：

The whole idea was preposterous.整个想法都荒唐透顶。
It would be preposterous to shovel coal with a teaspoon.用茶匙铲煤是荒谬的。
45 lucid
adj.明白易懂的，清晰的，头脑清楚的

参考例句：

His explanation was lucid and to the point.他的解释扼要易懂。
He wasn't very lucid,he didn't quite know where he was.他神志不是很清醒，不太知道自己在哪里。
46 abode
n.住处，住所

参考例句：

It was ten months before my father discovered his abode.父亲花了十个月的功夫，才好不容易打听到他的住处。
Welcome to our humble abode!欢迎光临寒舍！
47 unwilling
adj.不情愿的

参考例句：

The natives were unwilling to be bent by colonial power.土著居民不愿受殖民势力的摆布。
His tightfisted employer was unwilling to give him a raise.他那吝啬的雇主不肯给他加薪。
48 remonstrance
n抗议，抱怨

参考例句：

She had abandoned all attempts at remonstrance with Thomas.她已经放弃了一切劝戒托马斯的尝试。
Mrs. Peniston was at the moment inaccessible to remonstrance.目前彭尼斯顿太太没功夫听她告状。
49 subsided
v.（土地）下陷（因在地下采矿）( subside的过去式和过去分词 )；减弱；下降至较低或正常水平；一下子坐在椅子等上

参考例句：

After the heavy rains part of the road subsided. 大雨过后，部分公路塌陷了。 来自《简明英汉词典》
By evening the storm had subsided and all was quiet again. 傍晚， 暴风雨已经过去，四周开始沉寂下来。 来自《现代汉英综合大词典》
50 pint
n.品脱

参考例句：

I'll have a pint of beer and a packet of crisps, please.我要一品脱啤酒和一袋炸马铃薯片。
In the old days you could get a pint of beer for a shilling.从前，花一先令就可以买到一品脱啤酒。
51 refreshment
n.恢复，精神爽快，提神之事物；（复数）refreshments:点心，茶点

参考例句：

He needs to stop fairly often for refreshment.他须时不时地停下来喘口气。
A hot bath is a great refreshment after a day's work.在一天工作之后洗个热水澡真是舒畅。
52 prospering
成功，兴旺( prosper的现在分词 )

参考例句：

Our country is thriving and prospering day by day. 祖国日益繁荣昌盛。
His business is prospering. 他生意兴隆。
53 manly
adj.有男子气概的；adv.男子般地，果断地

参考例句：

The boy walked with a confident manly stride.这男孩以自信的男人步伐行走。
He set himself manly tasks and expected others to follow his example.他给自己定下了男子汉的任务，并希望别人效之。
54 meshes
网孔( mesh的名词复数 )； 网状物； 陷阱； 困境

参考例句：

The net of Heaven has large meshes, but it lets nothing through. 天网恢恢，疏而不漏。
This net has half-inch meshes. 这个网有半英寸见方的网孔。
55 anvil
n.铁钻

参考例句：

The blacksmith shaped a horseshoe on his anvil.铁匠在他的铁砧上打出一个马蹄形。
The anvil onto which the staples are pressed was not assemble correctly.订书机上的铁砧安装错位。
56 apron
n.围裙；工作裙

参考例句：

We were waited on by a pretty girl in a pink apron.招待我们的是一位穿粉红色围裙的漂亮姑娘。
She stitched a pocket on the new apron.她在新围裙上缝上一只口袋。
57 spoke
n.（车轮的）辐条；轮辐；破坏某人的计划；阻挠某人的行动 v.讲，谈（speak的过去式）；说；演说；从某种观点来说

参考例句：

They sourced the spoke nuts from our company.他们的轮辐螺帽是从我们公司获得的。
The spokes of a wheel are the bars that connect the outer ring to the centre.辐条是轮子上连接外圈与中心的条棒。
58 sufficiently
adv.足够地，充分地

参考例句：

It turned out he had not insured the house sufficiently.原来他没有给房屋投足保险。
The new policy was sufficiently elastic to accommodate both views.新政策充分灵活地适用两种观点。