Chapter 42

Well, I like turnips, tomatoes, eggplants, cauliflowers, onions and carrots. - This is turnip soup, made from real turnips. 2 ragged adj.

A ragged shout went up from the small crowd. Ragged clothing infers poverty. 3 tracts ( tract )

vast tracts of forest There are tracts of desert in Australia. 4 formerly adv.

We now enjoy these comforts of which formerly we had only heard. This boat was formerly used on the rivers of China. 5 skull n.

The skull bones fuse between the ages of fifteen and twenty-five.1525 He fell out of the window and cracked his skull. 6 poker n.vt.

He was cleared out in the poker game. I'm old enough to play poker and do something with it. 7 lobster n.

The lobster is a shellfish. I like lobster but it does not like me. 8 dab v.n.()

She returned wearing a dab of rouge on each cheekbone. She gave me a dab of potatoes with my supper. 9 vagrancy

The tramp was arrested for vagrancy. Vagrancy and begging has become commonplace in London. 10 lodging n.()

The bill is inclusive of the food and lodging. Where can you find lodging for the night? ? 11 flannel n.

She always wears a grey flannel trousers. She was looking luscious in a flannel shirt. 12 shroud n.vt.

His past was enveloped in a shroud of mystery. How can I do under shroud of a dark sky? 13 standing n.adj.

After the earthquake only a few houses were left standing. They're standing out against any change in the law. 14 brook n.v.

In our room we could hear the murmur of a distant brook. The brook trickled through the valley. 15 spoke n. v.speak

They sourced the spoke nuts from our company. The spokes of a wheel are the bars that connect the outer ring to the centre. 16 hardy adj.

The kind of plant is a hardy annual. He is a hardy person. 17 raved v.( rave )

Andrew raved all night in his fever. They raved about her beauty. 18 miserable adj.

It was miserable of you to make fun of him. Her past life was miserable. 19 wretch n.

You are really an ungrateful wretch to complain instead of thanking him. The dead husband is not the dishonoured wretch they fancied him. 20 prosecution n.

The Smiths brought a prosecution against the organizers. He attempts to rebut the assertion made by the prosecution witness. 21 guilt n.

She tried to cover up her guilt by lying. Don't lay a guilt trip on your child about schoolwork. 22 offender n.

They all sued out a pardon for an offender. The authorities often know that sex offenders will attack again when they are released. 23 reassuring a.

He gave her a reassuring pat on the shoulder. With a reassuring pat on her arm, he left. 24 abhorrent adj.

He is so abhorrent,saying such bullshit to confuse people. The idea of killing animals for food is abhorrent to many people. 25 marshes n.( marsh )

Cows were grazing on the marshes. We had to cross the marshes. 26 ashore adv.()

The children got ashore before the tide came in. He laid hold of the rope and pulled the boat ashore. 27 tangle n.v.()

I shouldn't tangle with Peter.He is bigger than me. If I were you, I wouldn't tangle with them. 28 professed

These, at least, were their professed reasons for pulling out of the deal. Her manner professed a gaiety that she did not feel.