Chapter 10


Atticus was feeble: he was nearly fifty. When Jem and I asked him why he was so old,he said he got started late, which we felt reflected upon his abilities and manliness. Hewas much older than the parents of our school contemporaries, and there was nothingJem or I could say about him when our classmates said, My father


Jem was football crazy. Atticus was never too tired to play keep-away, but when Jemwanted to tackle him Atticus would say, Im too old for that, son.


Our father didnt do anything. He worked in an office, not in a drugstore. Atticus did notdrive a dump-truck for the county, he was not the sheriff, he did not farm, work in agarage, or do anything that could possibly arouse the admiration of anyone.


Besides that, he wore glasses. He was nearly blind in his left eye, and said left eyeswere the tribal curse of the Finches. Whenever he wanted to see something well, heturned his head and looked from his right eye.


He did not do the things our schoolmates fathers did: he never went hunting, he didnot play poker or fish or drink or smoke. He sat in the livingroom and read.


With these attributes, however, he would not remain as inconspicuous as we wishedhim to: that year, the school buzzed with talk about him defending Tom Robinson, noneof which was complimentary. After my bout with Cecil Jacobs when I committed myselfto a policy of cowardice, word got around that Scout Finch wouldnt fight any more, herdaddy wouldnt let her. This was not entirely correct: I wouldnt fight publicly for Atticus,but the family was private ground. I would fight anyone from a third cousin upwardstooth and nail. Francis Hancock, for example, knew that.


When he gave us our air-rifles Atticus wouldnt teach us to shoot. Uncle Jackinstructed us in the rudiments thereof; he said Atticus wasnt interested in guns. Atticussaid to Jem one day, Id rather you shot at tin cans in the back yard, but I know youll goafter birds. Shoot all the bluejays you want, if you can hit em, but remember its a sin tokill a mockingbird.


That was the only time I ever heard Atticus say it was a sin to do something, and Iasked Miss Maudie about it.


Your fathers right, she said. Mockingbirds dont do one thing but make music for usto enjoy. They dont eat up peoples gardens, dont nest in corncribs, they dont do onething but sing their hearts out for us. Thats why its a sin to kill a mockingbird.


Miss Maudie, this is an old neighborhood, aint it?


Been here longer than the town.


Nome, I mean the folks on our street are all old. Jem and mes the only childrenaround here. Mrs. Dubose is close on to a hundred and Miss Rachels old and so areyou and Atticus.


I dont call fifty very old, said Miss Maudie tartly. Not being wheeled around yet, amI? Neithers your father. But I must say Providence was kind enough to burn down thatold mausoleum of mine, Im too old to keep it upmaybe youre right, Jean Louise, thisis a settled neighborhood. Youve never been around young folks much, have you?


Yessum, at school.


I mean young grown-ups. Youre lucky, you know. You and Jem have the benefit ofyour fathers age. If your father was thirty youd find life quite different.


I sure would. Atticus cant do anything


Youd be surprised, said Miss Maudie. Theres life in him yet.


What can he do?


Well, he can make somebodys will so airtight cant anybody meddle with it.


Well, did you know hes the best checker-player in this town? Why, down at theLanding when we were coming up, Atticus Finch could beat everybody on both sides ofthe river.


Good Lord, Miss Maudie, Jem and me beat him all the time.


Its about time you found out its because he lets you. Did you know he can play aJews Harp?


This modest accomplishment served to make me even more ashamed of him.


Well she said.


Well, what, Miss Maudie?


Well nothing. Nothingit seems with all that youd be proud of him. Cant everybodyplay a Jews Harp. Now keep out of the way of the carpenters. Youd better go home, Illbe in my azaleas and cant watch you. Plank might hit you.


I went to the back yard and found Jem plugging away at a tin can, which seemedstupid with all the bluejays around. I returned to the front yard and busied myself for twohours erecting a complicated breastworks at the side of the porch, consisting of a tire,an orange crate, the laundry hamper, the porch chairs, and a small U.S. flag Jem gaveme from a popcorn box.


When Atticus came home to dinner he found me crouched down aiming across thestreet. What are you shooting at?


Miss Maudies rear end.


Atticus turned and saw my generous target bending over her bushes. He pushed hishat to the back of his head and crossed the street. Maudie, he called, I thought Idbetter warn you. Youre in considerable peril.


Miss Maudie straightened up and looked toward me. She said, Atticus, you are adevil from hell.


When Atticus returned he told me to break camp. Dont you ever let me catch youpointing that gun at anybody again, he said.


I wished my father was a devil from hell. I sounded out Calpurnia on the subject. Mr.


Finch? Why, he can do lots of things.


Like what? I asked.


Calpurnia scratched her head. Well, I dont rightly know, she said.


Jem underlined it when he asked Atticus if he was going out for the Methodists andAtticus said hed break his neck if he did, he was just too old for that sort of thing. TheMethodists were trying to pay off their church mortgage, and had challenged theBaptists to a game of touch football. Everybody in towns father was playing, it seemed,except Atticus. Jem said he didnt even want to go, but he was unable to resist footballin any form, and he stood gloomily on the sidelines with Atticus and me watching CecilJacobss father make touchdowns for the Baptists.


One Saturday Jem and I decided to go exploring with our air-rifles to see if we couldfind a rabbit or a squirrel. We had gone about five hundred yards beyond the RadleyPlace when I noticed Jem squinting at something down the street. He had turned hishead to one side and was looking out of the corners of his eyes.


Whatcha looking at?


That old dog down yonder, he said.


Thats old Tim Johnson, aint it?


Yeah.


Tim Johnson was the property of Mr. Harry Johnson who drove the Mobile bus andlived on the southern edge of town. Tim was a liver-colored bird dog, the pet ofMaycomb.


Whats he doing?


I dont know, Scout. We better go home.


Aw Jem, its February.


I dont care, Im gonna tell Cal.


We raced home and ran to the kitchen.


Cal, said Jem, can you come down the sidewalk a minute?


What for, Jem? I cant come down the sidewalk every time you want me.


Theres somethin wrong with an old dog down yonder.


Calpurnia sighed. I cant wrap up any dogs foot now. Theres some gauze in thebathroom, go get it and do it yourself.


Jem shook his head. Hes sick, Cal. Somethings wrong with him.


Whats he doin, trying to catch his tail?


No, hes doin like this.


Jem gulped like a goldfish, hunched his shoulders and twitched his torso. Hes goinlike that, only not like he means to.


Are you telling me a story, Jem Finch? Calpurnias voice hardened.


No Cal, I swear Im not.


Was he runnin?


No, hes just moseyin along, so slow you cant hardly tell it. Hes comin this way.


Calpurnia rinsed her hands and followed Jem into the yard. I dont see any dog, shesaid.


She followed us beyond the Radley Place and looked where Jem pointed. TimJohnson was not much more than a speck in the distance, but he was closer to us. Hewalked erratically, as if his right legs were shorter than his left legs. He reminded me ofa car stuck in a sandbed.


Hes gone lopsided, said Jem.


Calpurnia stared, then grabbed us by the shoulders and ran us home. She shut thewood door behind us, went to the telephone and shouted, Gimme Mr. Finchs office!


Mr. Finch! she shouted. This is Cal. I swear to God theres a mad dog down thestreet a piecehes comin this way, yes sir, hesMr. Finch, I declare he isold TimJohnson, yes sir yessir yes


She hung up and shook her head when we tried to ask her what Atticus had said. Sherattled the telephone hook and said, Miss Eula Maynow maam, Im through talkin toMr. Finch, please dont connect me no morelisten, Miss Eula May, can you call MissRachel and Miss Stephanie Crawford and whoevers got a phone on this street and tellem a mad dogs comin? Please maam!


Calpurnia listened. I know its February, Miss Eula May, but I know a mad dog when Isee one. Please maam hurry!


Calpurnia asked Jem, Radleys got a phone?


Jem looked in the book and said no. They wont come out anyway, Cal.


I dont care, Im gonna tell em.


She ran to the front porch, Jem and I at her heels. You stay in that house! she yelled.


Calpurnias message had been received by the neighborhood. Every wood door withinour range of vision was closed tight. We saw no trace of Tim Johnson. We watchedCalpurnia running toward the Radley Place, holding her skirt and apron above herknees. She went up to the front steps and banged on the door. She got no answer, andshe shouted, Mr. Nathan, Mr. Arthur, mad dogs comin! Mad dogs comin!


Shes supposed to go around in back, I said.


Jem shook his head. Dont make any difference now, he said.


Calpurnia pounded on the door in vain. No one acknowledged her warning; no oneseemed to have heard it.


As Calpurnia sprinted to the back porch a black Ford swung into the driveway. Atticusand Mr. Heck Tate got out.


Mr. Heck Tate was the sheriff of Maycomb County. He was as tall as Atticus, butthinner. He was long-nosed, wore boots with shiny metal eye-holes, boot pants and alumber jacket. His belt had a row of bullets sticking in it. He carried a heavy rifle. Whenhe and Atticus reached the porch, Jem opened the door.


Stay inside, son, said Atticus. Where is he, Cal?


He oughta be here by now, said Calpurnia, pointing down the street.


Not runnin, is he? asked Mr. Tate.


Naw sir, hes in the twitchin stage, Mr. Heck.


Should we go after him, Heck? asked Atticus.


We better wait, Mr. Finch. They usually go in a straight line, but you never can tell. Hemight follow the curvehope he does or hell go straight in the Radley back yard. Letswait a minute.


Dont think hell get in the Radley yard, said Atticus. Fencell stop him. Hell probablyfollow the road


I thought mad dogs foamed at the mouth, galloped, leaped and lunged at throats, andI thought they did it in August. Had Tim Johnson behaved thus, I would have been lessfrightened.


Nothing is more deadly than a deserted, waiting street. The trees were still, themockingbirds were silent, the carpenters at Miss Maudies house had vanished. I heardMr. Tate sniff, then blow his nose. I saw him shift his gun to the crook of his arm. I sawMiss Stephanie Crawfords face framed in the glass window of her front door. MissMaudie appeared and stood beside her. Atticus put his foot on the rung of a chair andrubbed his hand slowly down the side of his thigh.


There he is, he said softly.


Tim Johnson came into sight, walking dazedly in the inner rim of the curve parallel tothe Radley house.


Look at him, whispered Jem. Mr. Heck said they walked in a straight line. He canteven stay in the road.


He looks more sick than anything, I said.


Let anything get in front of him and hell come straight at it.


Mr. Tate put his hand to his forehead and leaned forward. Hes got it all right, Mr.


Finch.


Tim Johnson was advancing at a snails pace, but he was not playing or sniffing atfoliage: he seemed dedicated to one course and motivated by an invisible force that wasinching him toward us. We could see him shiver like a horse shedding flies; his jawopened and shut; he was alist, but he was being pulled gradually toward us.


Hes lookin for a place to die, said Jem.


Mr. Tate turned around. Hes far from dead, Jem, he hasnt got started yet.


Tim Johnson reached the side street that ran in front of the Radley Place, and whatremained of his poor mind made him pause and seem to consider which road he wouldtake. He made a few hesitant steps and stopped in front of the Radley gate; then hetried to turn around, but was having difficulty.


Atticus said, Hes within range, Heck. You better get him before he goes down theside streetLord knows whos around the corner. Go inside, Cal.


Calpurnia opened the screen door, latched it behind her, then unlatched it and heldonto the hook. She tried to block Jem and me with her body, but we looked out frombeneath her arms.


Take him, Mr. Finch. Mr. Tate handed the rifle to Atticus; Jem and I nearly fainted.


Dont waste time, Heck, said Atticus. Go on.


Mr. Finch, this is a one-shot job.


Atticus shook his head vehemently: Dont just stand there, Heck! He wont wait all dayfor you


For Gods sake, Mr. Finch, look where he is! Miss and youll go straight into theRadley house! I cant shoot that well and you know it!


I havent shot a gun in thirty years


Mr. Tate almost threw the rifle at Atticus. Id feel mighty comfortable if you did now,


he said.


In a fog, Jem and I watched our father take the gun and walk out into the middle of thestreet. He walked quickly, but I thought he moved like an underwater swimmer: time hadslowed to a nauseating crawl.


When Atticus raised his glasses Calpurnia murmured, Sweet Jesus help him, andput her hands to her cheeks.


Atticus pushed his glasses to his forehead; they slipped down, and he dropped themin the street. In the silence, I heard them crack. Atticus rubbed his eyes and chin; wesaw him blink hard.


In front of the Radley gate, Tim Johnson had made up what was left of his mind. Hehad finally turned himself around, to pursue his original course up our street. He madetwo steps forward, then stopped and raised his head. We saw his body go rigid.


With movements so swift they seemed simultaneous, Atticuss hand yanked a ball-tipped lever as he brought the gun to his shoulder.


The rifle cracked. Tim Johnson leaped, flopped over and crumpled on the sidewalk ina brown-and-white heap. He didnt know what hit him.


Mr. Tate jumped off the porch and ran to the Radley Place. He stopped in front of thedog, squatted, turned around and tapped his finger on his forehead above his left eye.


You were a little to the right, Mr. Finch, he called.


Always was, answered Atticus. If I had my druthers Id take a shotgun.


He stooped and picked up his glasses, ground the broken lenses to powder under hisheel, and went to Mr. Tate and stood looking down at Tim Johnson.


Doors opened one by one, and the neighborhood slowly came alive. Miss Maudiewalked down the steps with Miss Stephanie Crawford.


Jem was paralyzed. I pinched him to get him moving, but when Atticus saw us cominghe called, Stay where you are.


When Mr. Tate and Atticus returned to the yard, Mr. Tate was smiling. Ill have Zeebocollect him, he said. You havent forgot much, Mr. Finch. They say it never leavesyou.


Atticus was silent.


Atticus? said Jem.


Nothin.


I saw that, One-Shot Finch!


Atticus wheeled around and faced Miss Maudie. They looked at one another withoutsaying anything, and Atticus got into the sheriffs car. Come here, he said to Jem.


Dont you go near that dog, you understand? Dont go near him, hes just as dangerousdead as alive.


Yes sir, said Jem. Atticus


What, son?


Nothing.


Whats the matter with you, boy, cant you talk? said Mr. Tate, grinning at Jem.


Didnt you know your daddys


Hush, Heck, said Atticus, lets go back to town.


When they drove away, Jem and I went to Miss Stephanies front steps. We satwaiting for Zeebo to arrive in the garbage truck.


Jem sat in numb confusion, and Miss Stephanie said, Uh, uh, uh, whoda thought of amad dog in February? Maybe he wadnt mad, maybe he was just crazy. Id hate to seeHarry Johnsons face when he gets in from the Mobile run and finds Atticus Finchs shothis dog. Bet he was just full of fleas from somewhere


Miss Maudie said Miss Stephanied be singing a different tune if Tim Johnson was stillcoming up the street, that theyd find out soon enough, theyd send his head toMontgomery.


Jem became vaguely articulate: d you see him, Scout? d you see him just standinthere? n all of a sudden he just relaxed all over, an it looked like that gun was a partof him an he did it so quick, like I hafta aim for ten minutes fore I can hitsomethin


Miss Maudie grinned wickedly. Well now, Miss Jean Louise, she said, still think yourfather cant do anything? Still ashamed of him?


Nome, I said meekly.


Forgot to tell you the other day that besides playing the Jews Harp, Atticus Finch wasthe deadest shot in Maycomb County in his time.


Dead shot echoed Jem.


Thats what I said, Jem Finch. Guess youll change your tune now. The very idea,didnt you know his nickname was Ol One-Shot when he was a boy? Why, down at theLanding when he was coming up, if he shot fifteen times and hit fourteen doves hedcomplain about wasting ammunition.


He never said anything about that, Jem muttered.


Never said anything about it, did he?


No maam.


Wonder why he never goes huntin now, I said.


Maybe I can tell you, said Miss Maudie. If your fathers anything, hes civilized in hisheart. Marksmanships a gift of God, a talentoh, you have to practice to make itperfect, but shootins different from playing the piano or the like. I think maybe he put hisgun down when he realized that God had given him an unfair advantage over mostliving things. I guess he decided he wouldnt shoot till he had to, and he had to today.


Looks like hed be proud of it, I said.


People in their right minds never take pride in their talents, said Miss Maudie.


We saw Zeebo drive up. He took a pitchfork from the back of the garbage truck andgingerly lifted Tim Johnson. He pitched the dog onto the truck, then poured somethingfrom a gallon jug on and around the spot where Tim fell. Dont yawl come over here fora while, he called.


When we went home I told Jem wed really have something to talk about at school onMonday. Jem turned on me.


Dont say anything about it, Scout, he said.


What? I certainly am. Aint everybodys daddy the deadest shot in Maycomb County.


Jem said, I reckon if hed wanted us to know it, heda told us. If he was proud of it,heda told us.


Maybe it just slipped his mind, I said.


Naw, Scout, its something you wouldnt understand. Atticus is real old, but I wouldntcare if he couldnt do anythingI wouldnt care if he couldnt do a blessed thing.


Jem picked up a rock and threw it jubilantly at the carhouse. Running after it, he calledback: Atticus is a gentleman, just like me!