Chapter 9


You can just take that back, boy!


This order, given by me to Cecil Jacobs, was the beginning of a rather thin time forJem and me. My fists were clenched and I was ready to let fly. Atticus had promised mehe would wear me out if he ever heard of me fighting any more; I was far too old and toobig for such childish things, and the sooner I learned to hold in, the better off everybodywould be. I soon forgot.


Cecil Jacobs made me forget. He had announced in the schoolyard the day beforethat Scout Finchs daddy defended niggers. I denied it, but told Jem.


Whatd he mean sayin that? I asked.


Nothing, Jem said. Ask Atticus, hell tell you.


Do you defend niggers, Atticus? I asked him that evening.


Of course I do. Dont say nigger, Scout. Thats common.


s what everybody at school says.


From now on itll be everybody less one


Well if you dont want me to grow up talkin that way, why do you send me to school?


My father looked at me mildly, amusement in his eyes. Despite our compromise, mycampaign to avoid school had continued in one form or another since my first daysdose of it: the beginning of last September had brought on sinking spells, dizziness, andmild gastric complaints. I went so far as to pay a nickel for the privilege of rubbing myhead against the head of Miss Rachels cooks son, who was afflicted with a tremendousringworm. It didnt take.


But I was worrying another bone. Do all lawyers defend n-Negroes, Atticus?


Of course they do, Scout.


Then why did Cecil say you defended niggers? He made it sound like you wererunnin a still.


Atticus sighed. Im simply defending a Negrohis names Tom Robinson. He lives inthat little settlement beyond the town dump. Hes a member of Calpurnias church, andCal knows his family well. She says theyre clean-living folks. Scout, you arent oldenough to understand some things yet, but theres been some high talk around town tothe effect that I shouldnt do much about defending this man. Its a peculiar caseitwont come to trial until summer session. John Taylor was kind enough to give us apostponement


If you shouldnt be defendin him, then why are you doin it?


For a number of reasons, said Atticus. The main one is, if I didnt I couldnt hold upmy head in town, I couldnt represent this county in the legislature, I couldnt even tellyou or Jem not to do something again.


You mean if you didnt defend that man, Jem and me wouldnt have to mind you anymore?


Thats about right.


Because I could never ask you to mind me again. Scout, simply by the nature of thework, every lawyer gets at least one case in his lifetime that affects him personally. Thisones mine, I guess. You might hear some ugly talk about it at school, but do one thingfor me if you will: you just hold your head high and keep those fists down. No matterwhat anybody says to you, dont you let em get your goat. Try fighting with your headfor a change its a good one, even if it does resist learning.


Atticus, are we going to win it?


No, honey.


Then why


Simply because we were licked a hundred years before we started is no reason for usnot to try to win, Atticus said.


You sound like Cousin Ike Finch, I said. Cousin Ike Finch was Maycomb Countyssole surviving Confederate veteran. He wore a General Hood type beard of which hewas inordinately vain. At least once a year Atticus, Jem and I called on him, and I wouldhave to kiss him. It was horrible. Jem and I would listen respectfully to Atticus andCousin Ike rehash the war. Tell you, Atticus, Cousin Ike would say, the MissouriCompromise was what licked us, but if I had to go through it agin Id walk every step ofthe way there an every step back jist like I did before an furthermore wed whip em thistime now in 1864, when Stonewall Jackson came around byI beg your pardon,young folks. Ol Blue Light was in heaven then, God rest his saintly brow


Come here, Scout, said Atticus. I crawled into his lap and tucked my head under hischin. He put his arms around me and rocked me gently. Its different this time, he said.


This time we arent fighting the Yankees, were fighting our friends. But remember this,no matter how bitter things get, theyre still our friends and this is still our home.


With this in mind, I faced Cecil Jacobs in the schoolyard next day: You gonna takethat back, boy?


You gotta make me first! he yelled. My folks said your daddy was a disgrace an thatnigger oughta hang from the water-tank!


I drew a bead on him, remembered what Atticus had said, then dropped my fists andwalked away, Scouts a cowward! ringing in my ears. It was the first time I everwalked away from a fight.


Somehow, if I fought Cecil I would let Atticus down. Atticus so rarely asked Jem andme to do something for him, I could take being called a coward for him. I felt extremelynoble for having remembered, and remained noble for three weeks. Then Christmascame and disaster struck.


Jem and I viewed Christmas with mixed feelings. The good side was the tree andUncle Jack Finch. Every Christmas Eve day we met Uncle Jack at Maycomb Junction,and he would spend a week with us.


A flip of the coin revealed the uncompromising lineaments of Aunt Alexandra andFrancis.


I suppose I should include Uncle Jimmy, Aunt Alexandras husband, but as he neverspoke a word to me in my life except to say, Get off the fence, once, I never saw anyreason to take notice of him. Neither did Aunt Alexandra. Long ago, in a burst offriendliness, Aunty and Uncle Jimmy produced a son named Henry, who left home assoon as was humanly possible, married, and produced Francis. Henry and his wifedeposited Francis at his grandparents every Christmas, then pursued their ownpleasures.


No amount of sighing could induce Atticus to let us spend Christmas day at home. Wewent to Finchs Landing every Christmas in my memory. The fact that Aunty was a goodcook was some compensation for being forced to spend a religious holiday with FrancisHancock. He was a year older than I, and I avoided him on principle: he enjoyedeverything I disapproved of, and disliked my ingenuous diversions.


Aunt Alexandra was Atticuss sister, but when Jem told me about changelings andsiblings, I decided that she had been swapped at birth, that my grandparents hadperhaps received a Crawford instead of a Finch. Had I ever harbored the mysticalnotions about mountains that seem to obsess lawyers and judges, Aunt Alexandrawould have been analogous to Mount Everest: throughout my early life, she was coldand there.


When Uncle Jack jumped down from the train Christmas Eve day, we had to wait forthe porter to hand him two long packages. Jem and I always thought it funny whenUncle Jack pecked Atticus on the cheek; they were the only two men we ever saw kisseach other. Uncle Jack shook hands with Jem and swung me high, but not high enough:


Uncle Jack was a head shorter than Atticus; the baby of the family, he was younger thanAunt Alexandra. He and Aunty looked alike, but Uncle Jack made better use of his face:


we were never wary of his sharp nose and chin.


He was one of the few men of science who never terrified me, probably because henever behaved like a doctor. Whenever he performed a minor service for Jem and me,as removing a splinter from a foot, he would tell us exactly what he was going to do,give us an estimation of how much it would hurt, and explain the use of any tongs heemployed. One Christmas I lurked in corners nursing a twisted splinter in my foot,permitting no one to come near me. When Uncle Jack caught me, he kept me laughingabout a preacher who hated going to church so much that every day he stood at hisgate in his dressing-gown, smoking a hookah and delivering five-minute sermons to anypassers-by who desired spiritual comfort.


I interrupted to make Uncle Jack let me knowwhen he would pull it out, but he held up a bloody splinter in a pair of tweezers and saidhe yanked it while I was laughing, that was what was known as relativity.


Whats in those packages? I asked him, pointing to the long thin parcels the porterhad given him.


None of your business, he said.


Jem said, Hows Rose Aylmer?


Rose Aylmer was Uncle Jacks cat. She was a beautiful yellow female Uncle Jack saidwas one of the few women he could stand permanently. He reached into his coat pocketand brought out some snapshots. We admired them.


Shes gettin fat, I said.


I should think so. She eats all the leftover fingers and ears from the hospital.


Aw, thats a damn story, I said.


I beg your pardon?


Atticus said, Dont pay any attention to her, Jack. Shes trying you out. Cal says shesbeen cussing fluently for a week, now. Uncle Jack raised his eyebrows and saidnothing. I was proceeding on the dim theory, aside from the innate attractiveness ofsuch words, that if Atticus discovered I had picked them up at school he wouldnt makeme go.


But at supper that evening when I asked him to pass the damn ham, please, UncleJack pointed at me. See me afterwards, young lady, he said.


When supper was over, Uncle Jack went to the livingroom and sat down. He slappedhis thighs for me to come sit on his lap. I liked to smell him: he was like a bottle ofalcohol and something pleasantly sweet. He pushed back my bangs and looked at me.


Youre more like Atticus than your mother, he said. Youre also growing out of yourpants a little.


I reckon they fit all right.


You like words like damn and hell now, dont you?


I said I reckoned so.


Well I dont, said Uncle Jack, not unless theres extreme provocation connected withem. Ill be here a week, and I dont want to hear any words like that while Im here.


Scout, youll get in trouble if you go around saying things like that. You want to grow upto be a lady, dont you?


I said not particularly.


Of course you do. Now lets get to the tree.


We decorated the tree until bedtime, and that night I dreamed of the two longpackages for Jem and me. Next morning Jem and I dived for them: they were fromAtticus, who had written Uncle Jack to get them for us, and they were what we hadasked for.


Dont point them in the house, said Atticus, when Jem aimed at a picture on the wall.


Youll have to teach em to shoot, said Uncle Jack.


Thats your job, said Atticus. I merely bowed to the inevitable.


It took Atticuss courtroom voice to drag us away from the tree. He declined to let ustake our air rifles to the Landing (I had already begun to think of shooting Francis) andsaid if we made one false move hed take them away from us for good.


Finchs Landing consisted of three hundred and sixty-six steps down a high bluff andending in a jetty. Farther down stream, beyond the bluff, were traces of an old cottonlanding, where Finch Negroes had loaded bales and produce, unloaded blocks of ice,flour and sugar, farm equipment, and feminine apparel. A two-rut road ran from theriverside and vanished among dark trees. At the end of the road was a two-storied whitehouse with porches circling it upstairs and downstairs. In his old age, our ancestorSimon Finch had built it to please his nagging wife; but with the porches all resemblanceto ordinary houses of its era ended. The internal arrangements of the Finch house wereindicative of Simons guilelessness and the absolute trust with which he regarded hisoffspring.


There were six bedrooms upstairs, four for the eight female children, one for WelcomeFinch, the sole son, and one for visiting relatives. Simple enough; but the daughters


rooms could be reached only by one staircase, Welcomes room and the guestroomonly by another. The Daughters Staircase was in the ground-floor bedroom of theirparents, so Simon always knew the hours of his daughters nocturnal comings andgoings.


There was a kitchen separate from the rest of the house, tacked onto it by a woodencatwalk; in the back yard was a rusty bell on a pole, used to summon field hands or as adistress signal; a widows walk was on the roof, but no widows walked therefrom it,Simon oversaw his overseer, watched the river-boats, and gazed into the lives ofsurrounding landholders.


There went with the house the usual legend about the Yankees: one Finch female,recently engaged, donned her complete trousseau to save it from raiders in theneighborhood; she became stuck in the door to the Daughters Staircase but wasdoused with water and finally pushed through. When we arrived at the Landing, AuntAlexandra kissed Uncle Jack, Francis kissed Uncle Jack, Uncle Jimmy shook handssilently with Uncle Jack, Jem and I gave our presents to Francis, who gave us a present.


Jem felt his age and gravitated to the adults, leaving me to entertain our cousin. Franciswas eight and slicked back his hair.


Whatd you get for Christmas? I asked politely.


Just what I asked for, he said. Francis had requested a pair of knee-pants, a redleather booksack, five shirts and an untied bow tie.


Thats nice, I lied. Jem and me got air rifles, and Jem got a chemistry set


A toy one, I reckon.


No, a real one. Hes gonna make me some invisible ink, and Im gonna write to Dill init.


Francis asked what was the use of that.


Well, cant you just see his face when he gets a letter from me with nothing in it? Itlldrive him nuts.


Talking to Francis gave me the sensation of settling slowly to the bottom of the ocean.


He was the most boring child I ever met. As he lived in Mobile, he could not inform onme to school authorities, but he managed to tell everything he knew to Aunt Alexandra,who in turn unburdened herself to Atticus, who either forgot it or gave me hell,whichever struck his fancy. But the only time I ever heard Atticus speak sharply toanyone was when I once heard him say, Sister, I do the best I can with them! It hadsomething to do with my going around in overalls.


Aunt Alexandra was fanatical on the subject of my attire. I could not possibly hope tobe a lady if I wore breeches; when I said I could do nothing in a dress, she said I wasntsupposed to be doing things that required pants. Aunt Alexandras vision of mydeportment involved playing with small stoves, tea sets, and wearing the Add-A-Pearlnecklace she gave me when I was born; furthermore, I should be a ray of sunshine inmy fathers lonely life. I suggested that one could be a ray of sunshine in pants just aswell, but Aunty said that one had to behave like a sunbeam, that I was born good buthad grown progressively worse every year. She hurt my feelings and set my teethpermanently on edge, but when I asked Atticus about it, he said there were alreadyenough sunbeams in the family and to go on about my business, he didnt mind memuch the way I was.


At Christmas dinner, I sat at the little table in the diningroom; Jem and Francis sat withthe adults at the dining table. Aunty had continued to isolate me long after Jem andFrancis graduated to the big table. I often wondered what she thought Id do, get up andthrow something? I sometimes thought of asking her if she would let me sit at the bigtable with the rest of them just once, I would prove to her how civilized I could be; afterall, I ate at home every day with no major mishaps. When I begged Atticus to use hisinfluence, he said he had nonewe were guests, and we sat where she told us to sit.


He also said Aunt Alexandra didnt understand girls much, shed never had one.


But her cooking made up for everything: three kinds of meat, summer vegetables fromher pantry shelves; peach pickles, two kinds of cake and ambrosia constituted a modestChristmas dinner. Afterwards, the adults made for the livingroom and sat around in adazed condition. Jem lay on the floor, and I went to the back yard. Put on your coat,


said Atticus dreamily, so I didnt hear him.


Francis sat beside me on the back steps. That was the best yet, I said.


Grandmas a wonderful cook, said Francis. Shes gonna teach me how.


Boys dont cook. I giggled at the thought of Jem in an apron.


Grandma says all men should learn to cook, that men oughta be careful with theirwives and wait on em when they dont feel good, said my cousin.


I dont want Dill waitin on me, I said. Id rather wait on him.


Yeah. Dont say anything about it yet, but were gonna get married as soon as werebig enough. He asked me last summer.


Francis hooted.


Whats the matter with him? I asked. Aint anything the matter with him.


You mean that little runt Grandma says stays with Miss Rachel every summer?


Thats exactly who I mean.


I know all about him, said Francis.


What about him?


Grandma says he hasnt got a home


Has too, he lives in Meridian.


he just gets passed around from relative to relative, and Miss Rachel keeps himevery summer.


Francis, thats not so!


Francis grinned at me. Youre mighty dumb sometimes, Jean Louise. Guess youdont know any better, though.


What do you mean?


If Uncle Atticus lets you run around with stray dogs, thats his own business, likeGrandma says, so it aint your fault. I guess it aint your fault if Uncle Atticus is a nigger-lover besides, but Im here to tell you it certainly does mortify the rest of the family


Francis, what the hell do you mean?


Just what I said. Grandma says its bad enough he lets you all run wild, but now hesturned out a nigger-lover well never be able to walk the streets of Maycomb agin. Hesruinin the family, thats what hes doin.


Francis rose and sprinted down the catwalk to the old kitchen. At a safe distance hecalled, Hes nothin but a nigger-lover!


He is not! I roared. I dont know what youre talkin about, but you better cut it outthis red hot minute!


I leaped off the steps and ran down the catwalk. It was easy to collar Francis. I saidtake it back quick.


Francis jerked loose and sped into the old kitchen. Nigger-lover! he yelled.


When stalking ones prey, it is best to take ones time. Say nothing, and as sure aseggs he will become curious and emerge. Francis appeared at the kitchen door. Youstill mad, Jean Louise? he asked tentatively.


Nothing to speak of, I said.


Francis came out on the catwalk.


You gonna take it back, Fraancis? But I was too quick on the draw. Francis shotback into the kitchen, so I retired to the steps. I could wait patiently. I had sat thereperhaps five minutes when I heard Aunt Alexandra speak: Wheres Francis?


Hes out yonder in the kitchen.


He knows hes not supposed to play in there.


Francis came to the door and yelled, Grandma, shes got me in here and she wontlet me out!


What is all this, Jean Louise?


I looked up at Aunt Alexandra. I havent got him in there, Aunty, I aint holdin him.


Yes she is, shouted Francis, she wont let me out!


Have you all been fussing?


Jean Louise got mad at me, Grandma, called Francis.


Francis, come out of there! Jean Louise, if I hear another word out of you Ill tell yourfather. Did I hear you say hell a while ago?


Nome.


I thought I did. Id better not hear it again.


Aunt Alexandra was a back-porch listener. The moment she was out of sight Franciscame out head up and grinning. Dont you fool with me, he said.


He jumped into the yard and kept his distance, kicking tufts of grass, turning aroundoccasionally to smile at me. Jem appeared on the porch, looked at us, and went away.


Francis climbed the mimosa tree, came down, put his hands in his pockets and strolledaround the yard. Hah! he said. I asked him who he thought he was, Uncle Jack?


Francis said he reckoned I got told, for me to just sit there and leave him alone.


I aint botherin you, I said.


Francis looked at me carefully, concluded that I had been sufficiently subdued, andcrooned softly, Nigger-lover


This time, I split my knuckle to the bone on his front teeth. My left impaired, I sailed inwith my right, but not for long. Uncle Jack pinned my arms to my sides and said, Standstill!


Aunt Alexandra ministered to Francis, wiping his tears away with her handkerchief,rubbing his hair, patting his cheek. Atticus, Jem, and Uncle Jimmy had come to the backporch when Francis started yelling.


Who started this? said Uncle Jack.


Francis and I pointed at each other. Grandma, he bawled, she called me a whore-lady and jumped on me!


Is that true, Scout? said Uncle Jack.


I reckon so.


When Uncle Jack looked down at me, his features were like Aunt Alexandras. Youknow I told you youd get in trouble if you used words like that? I told you, didnt I?


Yes sir, but


Well, youre in trouble now. Stay there.


I was debating whether to stand there or run, and tarried in indecision a moment toolong: I turned to flee but Uncle Jack was quicker. I found myself suddenly looking at atiny ant struggling with a bread crumb in the grass.


Ill never speak to you again as long as I live! I hate you an despise you an hope youdie tomorrow! A statement that seemed to encourage Uncle Jack, more than anything. Iran to Atticus for comfort, but he said I had it coming and it was high time we wenthome. I climbed into the back seat of the car without saying good-bye to anyone, and athome I ran to my room and slammed the door. Jem tried to say something nice, but Iwouldnt let him.


When I surveyed the damage there were only seven or eight red marks, and I wasreflecting upon relativity when someone knocked on the door. I asked who it was; UncleJack answered.


Go away!


Uncle Jack said if I talked like that hed lick me again, so I was quiet. When he enteredthe room I retreated to a corner and turned my back on him. Scout, he said, do youstill hate me?


Go on, please sir.


Why, I didnt think youd hold it against me, he said. Im disappointed in youyouhad that coming and you know it.


Didnt either.


Honey, you cant go around calling people


You aint fair, I said, you aint fair.


Uncle Jacks eyebrows went up. Not fair? How not?


Youre real nice, Uncle Jack, an I reckon I love you even after what you did, but youdont understand children much.


Uncle Jack put his hands on his hips and looked down at me. And why do I notunderstand children, Miss Jean Louise? Such conduct as yours required littleunderstanding. It was obstreperous, disorderly and abusive


You gonna give me a chance to tell you? I dont mean to sass you, Im just tryin totell you.


Uncle Jack sat down on the bed. His eyebrows came together, and he peered up atme from under them. Proceed, he said.


I took a deep breath. Well, in the first place you never stopped to gimme a chance totell you my side of ityou just lit right into me. When Jem an I fuss Atticus doesnt everjust listen to Jems side of it, he hears mine too, an in the second place you told menever to use words like that except in ex-extreme provocation, and Francis provocatedme enough to knock his block off


Uncle Jack scratched his head. What was your side of it, Scout?


Francis called Atticus somethin, an I wasnt about to take it off him.


What did Francis call him?


A nigger-lover. I aint very sure what it means, but the way Francis said ittell youone thing right now, Uncle Jack, Ill beI swear before God if Ill sit there and let himsay somethin about Atticus.


He called Atticus that?


Yes sir, he did, an a lot more. Said Atticusd be the ruination of the family an he letJem an me run wild


From the look on Uncle Jacks face, I thought I was in for it again. When he said,Well see about this, I knew Francis was in for it. Ive a good mind to go out theretonight.


Please sir, just let it go. Please.


Ive no intention of letting it go, he said. Alexandra should know about this. The ideaofwaitll I get my hands on that boy


Uncle Jack, please promise me somethin, please sir. Promise you wont tell Atticusabout this. Hehe asked me one time not to let anything I heard about him make memad, an Id ruther him think we were fightin about somethin else instead. Pleasepromise


But I dont like Francis getting away with something like that


He didnt. You reckon you could tie up my hand? Its still bleedin some.


Of course I will, baby. I know of no hand I would be more delighted to tie up. Will youcome this way?


Uncle Jack gallantly bowed me to the bathroom. While he cleaned and bandaged myknuckles, he entertained me with a tale about a funny nearsighted old gentleman whohad a cat named Hodge, and who counted all the cracks in the sidewalk when he wentto town. There now, he said. Youll have a very unladylike scar on your wedding-ringfinger.


Thank you sir. Uncle Jack?


Whats a whore-lady?


Uncle Jack plunged into another long tale about an old Prime Minister who sat in theHouse of Commons and blew feathers in the air and tried to keep them there when allabout him men were losing their heads. I guess he was trying to answer my question,but he made no sense whatsoever.


Later, when I was supposed to be in bed, I went down the hall for a drink of water andheard Atticus and Uncle Jack in the livingroom:


I shall never marry, Atticus.


I might have children.


Atticus said, Youve a lot to learn, Jack.


I know. Your daughter gave me my first lessons this afternoon. She said I didntunderstand children much and told me why. She was quite right. Atticus, she told mehow I should have treated heroh dear, Im so sorry I romped on her.


Atticus chuckled. She earned it, so dont feel too remorseful.


I waited, on tenterhooks, for Uncle Jack to tell Atticus my side of it. But he didnt. Hesimply murmured, Her use of bathroom invective leaves nothing to the imagination. Butshe doesnt know the meaning of half she saysshe asked me what a whore-ladywas


Did you tell her?


No, I told her about Lord Melbourne.


Jack! When a child asks you something, answer him, for goodness sake. But dontmake a production of it. Children are children, but they can spot an evasion quicker thanadults, and evasion simply muddles em. No, my father mused, you had the rightanswer this afternoon, but the wrong reasons. Bad language is a stage all children gothrough, and it dies with time when they learn theyre not attracting attention with it.


Hotheadedness isnt. Scouts got to learn to keep her head and learn soon, with whatsin store for her these next few months. Shes coming along, though. Jems getting olderand she follows his example a good bit now. All she needs is assistance sometimes.


Atticus, youve never laid a hand on her.


I admit that. So far Ive been able to get by with threats. Jack, she minds me as wellas she can. Doesnt come up to scratch half the time, but she tries.


Thats not the answer, said Uncle Jack.


No, the answer is she knows I know she tries. Thats what makes the difference.


What bothers me is that she and Jem will have to absorb some ugly things pretty soon.


Im not worried about Jem keeping his head, but Scoutd just as soon jump on someoneas look at him if her prides at stake


I waited for Uncle Jack to break his promise. He still didnt.


Atticus, how bad is this going to be? You havent had too much chance to discuss it.


It couldnt be worse, Jack. The only thing weve got is a black mans word against theEwells. The evidence boils down to you-didI-didnt. The jury couldnt possibly beexpected to take Tom Robinsons word against the Ewellsare you acquainted with theEwells?


Uncle Jack said yes, he remembered them. He described them to Atticus, but Atticussaid, Youre a generation off. The present ones are the same, though.


What are you going to do, then?


Before Im through, I intend to jar the jury a bitI think well have a reasonablechance on appeal, though. I really cant tell at this stage, Jack. You know, Id hoped toget through life without a case of this kind, but John Taylor pointed at me and said,Youre It.


Let this cup pass from you, eh?


Right. But do you think I could face my children otherwise? You know whats going tohappen as well as I do, Jack, and I hope and pray I can get Jem and Scout through itwithout bitterness, and most of all, without catching Maycombs usual disease. Whyreasonable people go stark raving mad when anything involving a Negro comes up, issomething I dont pretend to understand I just hope that Jem and Scout come to mefor their answers instead of listening to the town. I hope they trust me enough JeanLouise?


My scalp jumped. I stuck my head around the corner. Sir?


Go to bed.


I scurried to my room and went to bed. Uncle Jack was a prince of a fellow not to letme down. But I never figured out how Atticus knew I was listening, and it was not untilmany years later that I realized he wanted me to hear every word he said.