Chapter 23


I wish Bob Ewell wouldnt chew tobacco, was all Atticus said about it.


According to Miss Stephanie Crawford, however, Atticus was leaving the post officewhen Mr. Ewell approached him, cursed him, spat on him, and threatened to kill him.


Miss Stephanie (who, by the time she had told it twice was there and had seen it allpassing by from the Jitney Jungle, she was)Miss Stephanie said Atticus didnt bat aneye, just took out his handkerchief and wiped his face and stood there and let Mr. Ewellcall him names wild horses could not bring her to repeat. Mr. Ewell was a veteran of anobscure war; that plus Atticuss peaceful reaction probably prompted him to inquire,Too proud to fight, you nigger-lovin bastard? Miss Stephanie said Atticus said, No,too old, put his hands in his pockets and strolled on. Miss Stephanie said you had tohand it to Atticus Finch, he could be right dry sometimes.


Jem and I didnt think it entertaining.


After all, though, I said, he was the deadest shot in the county one time. He could


You know he wouldnt carry a gun, Scout. He aint even got one said Jem. Youknow he didnt even have one down at the jail that night. He told me havin a gunarounds an invitation to somebody to shoot you.


This is different, I said. We can ask him to borrow one.


We did, and he said, Nonsense.


Dill was of the opinion that an appeal to Atticuss better nature might work: after all, wewould starve if Mr. Ewell killed him, besides be raised exclusively by Aunt Alexandra,and we all knew the first thing shed do before Atticus was under the ground good wouldbe to fire Calpurnia. Jem said it might work if I cried and flung a fit, being young and agirl. That didnt work either. But when he noticed us dragging around the neighborhood,not eating, taking little interest in our normal pursuits, Atticus discovered how deeplyfrightened we were. He tempted Jem with a new football magazine one night; when hesaw Jem flip the pages and toss it aside, he said, Whats bothering you, son?


Jem came to the point: Mr. Ewell.


What has happened?


Nothings happened. Were scared for you, and we think you oughta do somethingabout him.


Atticus smiled wryly. Do what? Put him under a peace bond?


When a man says hes gonna get you, looks like he means it.


He meant it when he said it, said Atticus. Jem, see if you can stand in Bob Ewellsshoes a minute. I destroyed his last shred of credibility at that trial, if he had any to beginwith. The man had to have some kind of comeback, his kind always does. So if spittingin my face and threatening me saved Mayella Ewell one extra beating, thats somethingIll gladly take. He had to take it out on somebody and Id rather it be me than thathouseful of children out there. You understand?


Jem nodded.


Aunt Alexandra entered the room as Atticus was saying, We dont have anything tofear from Bob Ewell, he got it all out of his system that morning.


I wouldnt be so sure of that, Atticus, she said. His kindd do anything to pay off agrudge. You know how those people are.


What on earth could Ewell do to me, sister?


Something furtive, Aunt Alexandra said. You may count on that.


Nobody has much chance to be furtive in Maycomb, Atticus answered.


After that, we were not afraid. Summer was melting away, and we made the most of it.


Atticus assured us that nothing would happen to Tom Robinson until the higher courtreviewed his case, and that Tom had a good chance of going free, or at least of havinga new trial. He was at Enfield Prison Farm, seventy miles away in Chester County. Iasked Atticus if Toms wife and children were allowed to visit him, but Atticus said no.


If he loses his appeal, I asked one evening, whatll happen to him?


Hell go to the chair, said Atticus, unless the Governor commutes his sentence. Nottime to worry yet, Scout. Weve got a good chance.


Jem was sprawled on the sofa reading Popular Mechanics. He looked up. It aintright. He didnt kill anybody even if he was guilty. He didnt take anybodys life.


You know rapes a capital offense in Alabama, said Atticus.


Yessir, but the jury didnt have to give him deathif they wanted to they couldvegave him twenty years.


Given, said Atticus. Tom Robinsons a colored man, Jem. No jury in this part of theworlds going to say, We think youre guilty, but not very, on a charge like that. It waseither a straight acquittal or nothing.


Jem was shaking his head. I know its not right, but I cant figure out whats wrongmaybe rape shouldnt be a capital offense


Atticus dropped his newspaper beside his chair. He said he didnt have any quarrelwith the rape statute, none what ever, but he did have deep misgivings when the stateasked for and the jury gave a death penalty on purely circumstantial evidence. Heglanced at me, saw I was listening, and made it easier. I mean, before a man issentenced to death for murder, say, there should be one or two eye-witnesses. Someone should be able to say, Yes, I was there and saw him pull the trigger.


But lots of folks have been hunghangedon circumstantial evidence, said Jem.


I know, and lots of em probably deserved it, toobut in the absence of eye-witnesses theres always a doubt, some times only the shadow of a doubt. The law saysreasonable doubt, but I think a defendants entitled to the shadow of a doubt. Theresalways the possibility, no matter how improbable, that hes innocent.


Then it all goes back to the jury, then. We oughta do away with juries. Jem wasadamant.


Atticus tried hard not to smile but couldnt help it. Youre rather hard on us, son. Ithink maybe there might be a better way. Change the law. Change it so that only judgeshave the power of fixing the penalty in capital cases.


Then go up to Montgomery and change the law.


Youd be surprised how hard thatd be. I wont live to see the law changed, and if youlive to see it youll be an old man.


This was not good enough for Jem. No sir, they oughta do away with juries. Hewasnt guilty in the first place and they said he was.


If you had been on that jury, son, and eleven other boys like you, Tom would be afree man, said Atticus. So far nothing in your life has interfered with your reasoningprocess. Those are twelve reasonable men in everyday life, Toms jury, but you sawsomething come between them and reason. You saw the same thing that night in frontof the jail. When that crew went away, they didnt go as reasonable men, they wentbecause we were there. Theres something in our world that makes men lose theirheadsthey couldnt be fair if they tried. In our courts, when its a white mans wordagainst a black mans, the white man always wins. Theyre ugly, but those are the factsof life.


Doesnt make it right, said Jem stolidly. He beat his fist softly on his knee. You justcant convict a man on evidence like thatyou cant.


You couldnt, but they could and did. The older you grow the more of it youll see. Theone place where a man ought to get a square deal is in a courtroom, be he any color ofthe rainbow, but people have a way of carrying their resentments right into a jury box.


As you grow older, youll see white men cheat black men every day of your life, but letme tell you something and dont you forget itwhenever a white man does that to ablack man, no matter who he is, how rich he is, or how fine a family he comes from, thatwhite man is trash.


Atticus was speaking so quietly his last word crashed on our ears. I looked up, and hisface was vehement. Theres nothing more sickening to me than a low-grade white manwholl take advantage of a Negros ignorance. Dont fool yourselvesits all adding upand one of these days were going to pay the bill for it. I hope its not in you childrenstime.


Jem was scratching his head. Suddenly his eyes widened. Atticus, he said, whydont people like us and Miss Maudie ever sit on juries? You never see anybody fromMaycomb on a jurythey all come from out in the woods.


Atticus leaned back in his rocking-chair. For some reason he looked pleased withJem. I was wondering when thatd occur to you, he said. There are lots of reasons.


For one thing, Miss Maudie cant serve on a jury because shes a woman


You mean women in Alabama cant? I was indignant.


I do. I guess its to protect our frail ladies from sordid cases like Toms. Besides,


Atticus grinned, I doubt if wed ever get a complete case triedthe ladiesd beinterrupting to ask questions.


Jem and I laughed. Miss Maudie on a jury would be impressive. I thought of old Mrs.


Dubose in her wheelchairStop that rapping, John Taylor, I want to ask this mansomething. Perhaps our forefathers were wise.


Atticus was saying, With people like usthats our share of the bill. We generally getthe juries we deserve. Our stout Maycomb citizens arent interested, in the first place. Inthe second place, theyre afraid. Then, theyre


Afraid, why? asked Jem.


Well, what ifsay, Mr. Link Deas had to decide the amount of damages to award,say, Miss Maudie, when Miss Rachel ran over her with a car. Link wouldnt like thethought of losing either ladys business at his store, would he? So he tells Judge Taylorthat he cant serve on the jury because he doesnt have anybody to keep store for himwhile hes gone. So Judge Taylor excuses him. Sometimes he excuses him wrathfully.


Whatd make him think either one of emd stop trading with him? I asked.


Jem said, Miss Rachel would, Miss Maudie wouldnt. But a jurys votes secret,Atticus.


Our father chuckled. Youve many more miles to go, son. A jurys votes supposed tobe secret. Serving on a jury forces a man to make up his mind and declare himselfabout something. Men dont like to do that. Sometimes its unpleasant.


Toms jury sho made up its mind in a hurry, Jem muttered.


Atticuss fingers went to his watchpocket. No it didnt, he said, more to himself thanto us. That was the one thing that made me think, well, this may be the shadow of abeginning. That jury took a few hours. An inevitable verdict, maybe, but usually it takesem just a few minutes. This time he broke off and looked at us. You might like toknow that there was one fellow who took considerable wearing downin the beginninghe was rarin for an outright acquittal.


Who? Jem was astonished.


Atticuss eyes twinkled. Its not for me to say, but Ill tell you this much. He was one ofyour Old Sarum friends


One of the Cunninghams? Jem yelped. One ofI didnt recognize any of emyoure jokin. He looked at Atticus from the corners of his eyes.


One of their connections. On a hunch, I didnt strike him. Just on a hunch. Couldve,but I didnt.


Golly Moses, Jem said reverently. One minute theyre tryin to kill him and the nexttheyre tryin to turn him loose Ill never understand those folks as long as I live.


Atticus said you just had to know em. He said the Cunninghams hadnt taken anythingfrom or off of anybody since they migrated to the New World. He said the other thingabout them was, once you earned their respect they were for you tooth and nail. Atticussaid he had a feeling, nothing more than a suspicion, that they left the jail that night withconsiderable respect for the Finches. Then too, he said, it took a thunderbolt plusanother Cunningham to make one of them change his mind. If wed had two of thatcrowd, wedve had a hung jury.


Jem said slowly, You mean you actually put on the jury a man who wanted to kill youthe night before? How could you take such a risk, Atticus, how could you?


When you analyze it, there was little risk. Theres no difference between one manwhos going to convict and another man whos going to convict, is there? Theres a faintdifference between a man whos going to convict and a man whos a little disturbed inhis mind, isnt there? He was the only uncertainty on the whole list.


What kin was that man to Mr. Walter Cunningham? I asked.


Atticus rose, stretched and yawned. It was not even our bedtime, but we knew hewanted a chance to read his newspaper. He picked it up, folded it, and tapped my head.


Lets see now, he droned to himself. Ive got it. Double first cousin.


How can that be?


Two sisters married two brothers. Thats all Ill tell youyou figure it out.


I tortured myself and decided that if I married Jem and Dill had a sister whom hemarried our children would be double first cousins. Gee minetti, Jem, I said, whenAtticus had gone, theyre funny folks. d you hear that, Aunty?


Aunt Alexandra was hooking a rug and not watching us, but she was listening. She satin her chair with her workbasket beside it, her rug spread across her lap. Why ladieshooked woolen rugs on boiling nights never became clear to me.


I heard it, she said.


I remembered the distant disastrous occasion when I rushed to young WalterCunninghams defense. Now I was glad Id done it. Soons school starts Im gonna askWalter home to dinner, I planned, having forgotten my private resolve to beat him upthe next time I saw him. He can stay over sometimes after school, too. Atticus coulddrive him back to Old Sarum. Maybe he could spend the night with us sometime, okay,Jem?


Well see about that, Aunt Alexandra said, a declaration that with her was always athreat, never a promise. Surprised, I turned to her. Why not, Aunty? Theyre goodfolks.


She looked at me over her sewing glasses. Jean Louise, there is no doubt in my mindthat theyre good folks. But theyre not our kind of folks.


Jem says, She means theyre yappy, Scout.


Whats a yap?


Aw, tacky. They like fiddlin and things like that.


Well I do too


Dont be silly, Jean Louise, said Aunt Alexandra. The thing is, you can scrub WalterCunningham till he shines, you can put him in shoes and a new suit, but hell never belike Jem. Besides, theres a drinking streak in that family a mile wide. Finch womenarent interested in that sort of people.


Aun-ty, said Jem, she aint nine yet.


She may as well learn it now.


Aunt Alexandra had spoken. I was reminded vividly of the last time she had put herfoot down. I never knew why. It was when I was absorbed with plans to visit CalpurniashouseI was curious, interested; I wanted to be her company, to see how she lived,who her friends were. I might as well have wanted to see the other side of the moon.


This time the tactics were different, but Aunt Alexandras aim was the same. Perhapsthis was why she had come to live with usto help us choose our friends. I would holdher off as long as I could: If theyre good folks, then why cant I be nice to Walter?


I didnt say not to be nice to him. You should be friendly and polite to him, you shouldbe gracious to everybody, dear. But you dont have to invite him home.


What if he was kin to us, Aunty?


The fact is that he is not kin to us, but if he were, my answer would be the same.


Aunty, Jem spoke up, Atticus says you can choose your friends but you sho cantchoose your family, an theyre still kin to you no matter whether you acknowledge emor not, and it makes you look right silly when you dont.


Thats your father all over again, said Aunt Alexandra, and I still say that JeanLouise will not invite Walter Cunningham to this house. If he were her double first cousinonce removed he would still not be received in this house unless he comes to seeAtticus on business. Now that is that.


She had said Indeed Not, but this time she would give her reasons: But I want to playwith Walter, Aunty, why cant I?


She took off her glasses and stared at me. Ill tell you why, she said. Becauseheistrash, thats why you cant play with him. Ill not have you around him, pickingup his habits and learning Lord-knows-what. Youre enough of a problem to your fatheras it is.


I dont know what I would have done, but Jem stopped me. He caught me by theshoulders, put his arm around me, and led me sobbing in fury to his bedroom. Atticusheard us and poked his head around the door. s all right, sir, Jem said gruffly, s notanything. Atticus went away.


Have a chew, Scout. Jem dug into his pocket and extracted a Tootsie Roll. It took afew minutes to work the candy into a comfortable wad inside my jaw.


Jem was rearranging the objects on his dresser. His hair stuck up behind and down infront, and I wondered if it would ever look like a mansmaybe if he shaved it off andstarted over, his hair would grow back neatly in place. His eyebrows were becomingheavier, and I noticed a new slimness about his body. He was growing taller. When helooked around, he must have thought I would start crying again, for he said, Show yousomething if you wont tell anybody. I said what. He unbuttoned his shirt, grinning shyly.


Well what?


Well cant you see it?


Well no.


Well its hair.


There. Right there.


He had been a comfort to me, so I said it looked lovely, but I didnt see anything. Itsreal nice, Jem.


Under my arms, too, he said. Goin out for football next year. Scout, dont let Auntyaggravate you.


It seemed only yesterday that he was telling me not to aggravate Aunty.


You know shes not used to girls, said Jem, leastways, not girls like you. Shestrying to make you a lady. Cant you take up sewin or somethin?


Hell no. She doesnt like me, thats all there is to it, and I dont care. It was her callinWalter Cunningham trash that got me goin, Jem, not what she said about being aproblem to Atticus. We got that all straight one time, I asked him if I was a problem andhe said not much of one, at most one that he could always figure out, and not to worrymy head a second about botherin him. Naw, it was Walterthat boys not trash, Jem.


He aint like the Ewells.


Jem kicked off his shoes and swung his feet to the bed. He propped himself against apillow and switched on the reading light. You know something, Scout? Ive got it allfigured out, now. Ive thought about it a lot lately and Ive got it figured out. Theres fourkinds of folks in the world. Theres the ordinary kind like us and the neighbors, theresthe kind like the Cunninghams out in the woods, the kind like the Ewells down at thedump, and the Negroes.


What about the Chinese, and the Cajuns down yonder in Baldwin County?


I mean in Maycomb County. The thing about it is, our kind of folks dont like theCunninghams, the Cunninghams dont like the Ewells, and the Ewells hate and despisethe colored folks.


I told Jem if that was so, then why didnt Toms jury, made up of folks like theCunninghams, acquit Tom to spite the Ewells?Jem waved my question away as being infantile.


You know, he said, Ive seen Atticus pat his foot when theres fiddlin on the radio,and he loves pot liquor bettern any man I ever saw


Then that makes us like the Cunninghams, I said. I cant see why Aunty


No, lemme finishit does, but were still different somehow. Atticus said one time thereason Auntys so hipped on the family is because all weve gots background and not adime to our names.


Well Jem, I dont knowAtticus told me one time that most of this Old Family stuffsfoolishness because everybodys familys just as old as everybody elses. I said did thatinclude the colored folks and Englishmen and he said yes.


Background doesnt mean Old Family, said Jem. I think its how long your familysbeen readin and writin. Scout, Ive studied this real hard and thats the only reason Ican think of. Somewhere along when the Finches were in Egypt one of em must havelearned a hieroglyphic or two and he taught his boy. Jem laughed. Imagine Auntybeing proud her great-grandaddy could read an writeladies pick funny things to beproud of.


Well Im glad he could, or whoda taught Atticus and them, and if Atticus couldntread, you and med be in a fix. I dont think thats what background is, Jem.


Well then, how do you explain why the Cunninghams are different? Mr. Walter canhardly sign his name, Ive seen him. Weve just been readin and writin longern theyhave.


No, everybodys gotta learn, nobodys born knowin. That Walters as smart as he canbe, he just gets held back sometimes because he has to stay out and help his daddy.


Nothins wrong with him. Naw, Jem, I think theres just one kind of folks. Folks.


Jem turned around and punched his pillow. When he settled back his face was cloudy.


He was going into one of his declines, and I grew wary. His brows came together; hismouth became a thin line. He was silent for a while.


Thats what I thought, too, he said at last, when I was your age. If theres just onekind of folks, why cant they get along with each other? If theyre all alike, why do theygo out of their way to despise each other? Scout, I think Im beginning to understandsomething. I think Im beginning to understand why Boo Radleys stayed shut up in thehouse all this time its because he wants to stay inside.