Chapter 29


Aunt Alexandra got up and reached for the mantelpiece. Mr. Tate rose, but shedeclined assistance. For once in his life, Atticuss instinctive courtesy failed him: he satwhere he was.


Somehow, I could think of nothing but Mr. Bob Ewell saying hed get Atticus if it tookhim the rest of his life. Mr. Ewell almost got him, and it was the last thing he did.


Are you sure? Atticus said bleakly.


Hes dead all right, said Mr. Tate. Hes good and dead. He wont hurt these childrenagain.


I didnt mean that. Atticus seemed to be talking in his sleep. His age was beginningto show, his one sign of inner turmoil, the strong line of his jaw melted a little, onebecame aware of telltale creases forming under his ears, one noticed not his jet-blackhair but the gray patches growing at his temples.


Hadnt we better go to the livingroom? Aunt Alexandra said at last.


If you dont mind, said Mr. Tate, Id rather us stay in here if it wont hurt Jem any. Iwant to have a look at his injuries while Scout tells us about it.


Is it all right if I leave? she asked. Im just one person too many in here. Ill be in myroom if you want me, Atticus. Aunt Alexandra went to the door, but she stopped andturned. Atticus, I had a feeling about this tonightIthis is my fault, she began. Ishould have


Mr. Tate held up his hand. You go ahead, Miss Alexandra, I know its been a shock toyou. And dont you fret yourself about anythingwhy, if we followed our feelings all thetime wed be like cats chasin their tails. Miss Scout, see if you can tell us whathappened, while its still fresh in your mind. You think you can? Did you see himfollowing you?


I went to Atticus and felt his arms go around me. I buried my head in his lap. Westarted home. I said Jem, Ive forgot mshoes. Soons we started back for em the lightswent out. Jem said I could get em tomorrow


Scout, raise up so Mr. Tate can hear you, Atticus said. I crawled into his lap.


Then Jem said hush a minute. I thought he was thinkinhe always wants you tohush so he can thinkthen he said he heard somethin. We thought it was Cecil.


Cecil Jacobs. He scared us once tonight, an we thought it was him again. He had ona sheet. They gave a quarter for the best costume, I dont know who won it


Where were you when you thought it was Cecil?


Just a little piece from the schoolhouse. I yelled somethin at him


You yelled, what?


Cecil Jacobs is a big fat hen, I think. We didnt hear nothinthen Jem yelled hello orsomethin loud enough to wake the dead


Just a minute, Scout, said Mr. Tate. Mr. Finch, did you hear them?


Atticus said he didnt. He had the radio on. Aunt Alexandra had hers going in herbedroom. He remembered because she told him to turn his down a bit so she couldhear hers. Atticus smiled. I always play a radio too loud.


I wonder if the neighbors heard anything said Mr. Tate.


I doubt it, Heck. Most of them listen to their radios or go to bed with the chickens.


Maudie Atkinson may have been up, but I doubt it.


Go ahead, Scout, Mr. Tate said.


Well, after Jem yelled we walked on. Mr. Tate, I was shut up in my costume but Icould hear it myself, then. Footsteps, I mean. They walked when we walked andstopped when we stopped. Jem said he could see me because Mrs. Crenshaw putsome kind of shiny paint on my costume. I was a ham.


Hows that? asked Mr. Tate, startled.


Atticus described my role to Mr. Tate, plus the construction of my garment. Youshould have seen her when she came in, he said, it was crushed to a pulp.


Mr. Tate rubbed his chin. I wondered why he had those marks on him, His sleeveswere perforated with little holes. There were one or two little puncture marks on his armsto match the holes. Let me see that thing if you will, sir.


Atticus fetched the remains of my costume. Mr. Tate turned it over and bent it aroundto get an idea of its former shape. This thing probably saved her life, he said. Look.


He pointed with a long forefinger. A shiny clean line stood out on the dull wire. BobEwell meant business, Mr. Tate muttered.


He was out of his mind, said Atticus.


Dont like to contradict you, Mr. Finchwasnt crazy, mean as hell. Low-down skunkwith enough liquor in him to make him brave enough to kill children. Hed never havemet you face to face.


Atticus shook his head. I cant conceive of a man whod


Mr. Finch, theres just some kind of men you have to shoot before you can say hidy toem. Even then, they aint worth the bullet it takes to shoot em. Ewell as one of em.


Atticus said, I thought he got it all out of him the day he threatened me. Even if hehadnt, I thought hed come after me.


He had guts enough to pester a poor colored woman, he had guts enough to pesterJudge Taylor when he thought the house was empty, so do you think heda met you toyour face in daylight? Mr. Tate sighed. Wed better get on. Scout, you heard himbehind you


Yes sir. When we got under the tree


Howd you know you were under the tree, you couldnt see thunder out there.


I was barefooted, and Jem says the grounds always cooler under a tree.


Well have to make him a deputy, go ahead.


Then all of a sudden somethin grabbed me an mashed my costume think I duckedon the ground heard a tusslin under the tree sort of they were bammin against thetrunk, sounded like. Jem found me and started pullin me toward the road. SomeMr.


Ewell yanked him down, I reckon. They tussled some more and then there was thisfunny noiseJem hollered I stopped. That was Jems arm.


Anyway, Jem hollered and I didnt hear him any more an the next thingMr. Ewellwas tryin to squeeze me to death, I reckon then somebody yanked Mr. Ewell down.


Jem must have got up, I guess. Thats all I know


And then? Mr. Tate was looking at me sharply.


Somebody was staggerin around and pantin andcoughing fit to die. I thought itwas Jem at first, but it didnt sound like him, so I went lookin for Jem on the ground. Ithought Atticus had come to help us and had got wore out


Who was it?


Why there he is, Mr. Tate, he can tell you his name.


As I said it, I half pointed to the man in the corner, but brought my arm down quicklylest Atticus reprimand me for pointing. It was impolite to point.


He was still leaning against the wall. He had been leaning against the wall when Icame into the room, his arms folded across his chest. As I pointed he brought his armsdown and pressed the palms of his hands against the wall. They were white hands,sickly white hands that had never seen the sun, so white they stood out garishly againstthe dull cream wall in the dim light of Jems room.


I looked from his hands to his sand-stained khaki pants; my eyes traveled up his thinframe to his torn denim shirt. His face was as white as his hands, but for a shadow onhis jutting chin. His cheeks were thin to hollowness; his mouth was wide; there wereshallow, almost delicate indentations at his temples, and his gray eyes were so colorlessI thought he was blind. His hair was dead and thin, almost feathery on top of his head.


When I pointed to him his palms slipped slightly, leaving greasy sweat streaks on thewall, and he hooked his thumbs in his belt. A strange small spasm shook him, as if heheard fingernails scrape slate, but as I gazed at him in wonder the tension slowlydrained from his face. His lips parted into a timid smile, and our neighbors imageblurred with my sudden tears.


Hey, Boo, I said.