Chapter 57


IT WAS A PALE, thin woman that Rhett put on the Jonesboro train a month later. Wade and Ella,who were to make the trip with her, were silent and uneasy at their mothers still, white face. Theyclung close to Prissy, for even to their childish minds there was something frightening in the cold,impersonal atmosphere between their mother and their stepfather.


Weak as she was, Scarlett was going home to Tara. She felt that she would stifle if she stayed inAtlanta another day, with her tired mind forcing itself round and round the deeply worn circle offutile thoughts about the mess she was in. She was sick in body and weary in mind and she wasstanding like a lost child in a nightmare country in which there was no familiar landmark to guideher.


As she had once fled Atlanta before an invading army, so she was fleeing it again, pressing herworries into the back of her mind with her old defense against the world: I wont think of it now. Icant stand it if I do. Ill think of it tomorrow at Tara. Tomorrows another day. It seemed that ifshe could only get back to the stillness and the green cotton fields of home, all her troubles wouldfall away and she would somehow be able to mold her shattered thoughts into something she couldlive by.


Rhett watched the train until it was out of sight and on his face there was a look of speculativebitterness that was not pleasant. He sighed, dismissed the carriage and mounting his horse, rodedown Ivy Street toward Melanies house.


It was a warm morning and Melanie sat on the vine-shaded porch, her mending basket piledhigh with socks. Confusion and dismay filled her when she saw Rhett alight from his horse andtoss the reins over the arm of the cast-iron negro boy who stood at the sidewalk. She had not seenhim alone since that too dreadful day when Scarlett had been so ill and he had been sowellsodrunk. Melanie hated even to think the word. She had spoken to him only casually duringScarletts convalescence and, on those occasions, she had found it difficult to meet his eyes.


However, he had been his usual bland self at those times, and never by look or word showed thatsuch a scene had taken place between them. Ashley had told her once that men frequently did notremember things said and done in drink and Melanie prayed heartily that Captain Butlers memoryhad failed him on that occasion. She felt she would rather die than learn that he remembered hisoutpourings. Timidity and embarrassment swept over her and waves of color mounted her cheeksas he came up the walk. But perhaps he had only come to ask if Beau could spend the day withBonnie. Surely he wouldnt have the bad taste to come and thank her for what she had done thatday!


She rose to meet him, noting with surprise, as always, how lightly he walked for a big man.


Scarlett has gone?


Yes. Tara will do her good, he said smiling. Sometimes I think shes like the giant Antaeuswho became stronger each time he touched Mother Earth. It doesnt do for Scarlett to stay awaytoo long from the patch of red mud she loves. The sight of cotton growing will do her more goodthan all Dr. Meades tonics.


Wont you sit down? said Melanie, her hands fluttering. He was so very large and male, andexcessively male creatures always discomposed her. They seem to radiate a force and vitality thatmade her feel smaller and weaker even than she was. He looked so swarthy and formidable and theheavy muscles in his shoulders swelled against his white linen coat in a way that frightened her. Itseemed impossible that she had seen all this strength and insolence brought low. And she had heldthat black head in her lap!


Oh, dear! she thought in distress and blushed again.


Miss Melly, he said gently, does my presence annoy you? Would you rather I went away?


Pray be frank.


Oh! she thought. He does remember! And he knows how upset I am!


She looked up at him, imploringly, and suddenly her embarrassment and confusion faded. Hiseyes were so quiet, so kind, so understanding that she wondered how she could ever have beensilly enough to be flurried. His face looked tired and, she thought with surprise, more than a littlesad. How could she have even thought hed be ill bred enough to bring up subjects both wouldrather forget?


Poor thing, hes been so worried about Scarlett, she thought, and managing a smile, she said:


Do sit down, Captain Butler.


He sat down heavily and watched her as she picked up her darning.


Miss Melly, Ive come to ask a very great favor of you and, he smiled and his mouth twisteddown, to enlist your aid in a deception from which I know you will shrink.


Adeception?


Yes. Really, Ive come to talk business to you.


Oh, dear. Then its Mr. Wilkes youd better see. Im such a goose about business. Im not smartlike Scarlett.


Im afraid Scarlett is too smart for her own good, he said, and that is exactly what I want totalk to you about. You know howill shes been. When she gets back from Tara she will startagain hammer and tongs with the store and those mills which I wish devoutly would explode somenight. I fear for her health, Miss Melly.


Yes, she does far too much. You must make her stop and take care of herself.


He laughed.


You know how headstrong she is. I never even try to argue with her. Shes just like a willfulchild. She wont let me help hershe wont let anyone help her. Ive tried to get her to sell hershare in the mills but she wont. And now, Miss Melly, I come to the business matter. I knowScarlett would sell the remainder of her interest in the mills to Mr. Wilkes but to no one else, and Iwant Mr. Wilkes to buy her out.


Oh, dear me! That would be nice but Melanie stopped and bit her lip. She could notmention money matters to an outsider. Somehow, despite what he made from the mill, she andAshley never seemed to have enough money. It worried her that they saved so little. She did not know where the money went. Ashley gave her enough to run the house on, but when it came toextra expenses they were often pinched. Of course, her doctors bills were so much, and then thebooks and furniture Ashley ordered from New York did run into money. And they had fed andclothed any number of waifs who slept in their cellar. And Ashley never felt like refusing a loan toany man whod been in the Confederate Army. AndMiss Melly, I want to lend you the money, said RhettThats so kind of you, but we might never repay it.


I dont want it repaid. Dont be angry with me, Miss Melly! Please hear me through. It willrepay me enough to know that Scarlett will not be exhausting herself driving miles to the millsevery day. The store will be enough to keep her busy and happy. ... Dont you see?


Wellyes said Melanie uncertainly.


You want your boy to have a pony dont you? And want him to go to the university and toHarvard and to Europe on a Grand Tour?


Oh, of course, cried Melanie, her face lighting up, as always, at the mention of Beau. I wanthim to have everything butwell, everyone is so poor these days that


Mr. Wilkes could make a pile of money out of the mills some day, said Rhett. And Id like tosee Beau have all the advantages he deserves.


Oh, Captain Butler, what a crafty wretch you are! she cried, smiling. Appealing to a motherspride! I can read you like a book.


I hope not, said Rhett, and for the first time there was a gleam in his eye. Now will you letme lend you the money?


But where does the deception come in?


We must be conspirators and deceive both Scarlett and Mr. Wilkes.


Oh, dear! I couldnt!


If Scarlett knew I had plotted behind her back, even for her own goodwell, you know hertemper! And Im afraid Mr. Wilkes would refuse any loan I offered him. So neither of them mustknow where the money comes from.


Oh, but Im sure Mr. Wilkes wouldnt refuse, if he understood the matter. He is so fond ofScarlett.


Yes, Im sure he is, said Rhett smoothly. But just the same he would refuse. You know howproud all the Wilkes are.


Oh, dear! cried Melanie miserably, I wish Really, Captain Butler, I couldnt deceive myhusband.


Not even to help Scarlett? Rhett looked very hurt. And she is so fond of you!


Tears trembled on Melanies eyelids.


You know Id do anything in the world for her. I can never, never half repay her for what shes done for me. You know.


Yes, he said shortly, I know what shes done for you. Couldnt you tell Mr. Wilkes that themoney was left you in the will of some relative?


Oh, Captain Butler, I havent a relative with a penny to bless him!


Then, if I sent the money through the mail to Mr. Wilkes without his knowing who sent it,would you see that it was used to buy the mills and notwell, given away to destitute ex-Confederates?


At first she looked hurt at his last words, as though they implied criticism of Ashley, but hesmiled so understandingly she smiled back.


Of course I will.


So its settled? Its to be our secret?


But I have never kept anything secret from my husband!


Im sure of that, Miss Melly.


As she looked at him she thought how right she had always been about him and how wrong somany other people were. People had said he was brutal and sneering and bad mannered and evendishonest Though many of the nicest people were now admitting they had been wrong. Well! Shehad known from the very beginning that he was a fine man. She had never received from himanything but the kindest treatment, thoughtfulness, utter respect and what understanding! And then,how he loved Scarlett! How sweet of him to take this roundabout way of sparing Scarlett one ofthe loads she carried!


In an impulsive rush of feeling, she said: Scarletts lucky to have a husband whos so nice toher!


You think so? Im afraid she wouldnt agree with you, if she could hear you. Besides, I want tobe nice to you too, Miss Melly. Im giving you more than Im giving Scarlett.


Me! she questioned, puzzled. Oh, you mean for Beau.


He picked up his hat and rose. He stood for a moment looking down at the plain, heart-shapedface with its long widows peak and serious dark eyes. Such an unworldly face, a face with nodefenses against life.


No, not Beau. Im trying to give you something more than Beau, if you can imagine that


No, I cant, she said, bewildered again. Theres nothing in the world more precious to methan Beau except Ashexcept Mr. Wilkes.


Rhett said nothing and looked down at her, his dark face still.


Youre mighty nice to want to do things for me, Captain Butler, but really, Im so lucky. I haveeverything in the world any woman could want.


Thats fine, said Rhett, suddenly grim. And I intend to see that you keep them.


When Scarlett came back from Tara, the unhealthy pallor had gone from her face and her cheekswere rounded and faintly pink. Her green eyes were alert and sparkling again, and she laughedaloud for the first time in weeks when Rhett and Bonnie met her and Wade and Ella at the depotlaughed in annoyance and amusement. Rhett had two straggling turkey feathers in the brim of hishat and Bonnie, dressed in a sadly torn dress that was her Sunday frock, had diagonal lines ofindigo blue on her cheeks and a peacock feather half as long as she was in her curls. Evidently agame of Indian had been in progress when the time came to meet the train and it was obvious fromthe look of quizzical helplessness on Rhetts face and the lowering indignation of Mammy thatBonnie had refused to have her toilet remedied, even to meet her mother.


Scarlett said: What a ragamuffin! as she kissed the child and turned a cheek for Rhetts lips.


There were crowds of people in the depot or she would never have invited this caress. She couldnot help noticing, for all her embarrassment at Bonnies appearance, that everyone in the crowdwas smiling at the figure father and daughter cut, smiling not in derision but in genuine amusementand kindness. Everyone knew that Scarletts youngest had her father under her thumb and Atlantawas amused and approving. Rhetts great love for his child had gone far toward reinstating him inpublic opinion.


On the way home, Scarlett was full of County news. The hot, dry weather was making thecotton grow so fast you could almost hear it but Will said cotton prices were going to be low thisfall. Suellen was going to have another babyshe spelled this out so the children would notcomprehendand Ella had shown unwonted spirit in biting Suellens oldest girl. Though,observed Scarlett, it was no more than little Susie deserved, she being her mother all over again.


But Suellen had become infuriated and they had had an invigorating quarrel that was just like oldtimes. Wade had killed a water moccasin, all by himself. Randa and Camilla Tarleton wereteaching school and wasnt that a joke? Not a one of the Tarletons had ever been able to spell cat!


Betsy Tarleton had married a fat one-armed man from Lovejoy and they and Hetty and JimTarleton were raising a good cotton crop at Fairhill. Mrs. Tarleton had a brood mare and a colt andwas as happy as though she had a million dollars. And there were negroes living in the old Calverthouse! Swarms of them and they actually owned it! Theyd bought it in at the sheriffs sale. Theplace was dilapidated and it made you cry to look at it. No one knew where Cathleen and her no-good husband had gone. And Alex was to marry Sally, his brothers widow! Imagine that, afterthem living in the same house for so many years! Everybody said it was a marriage of conveniencebecause people were beginning to gossip about them living there alone, since both Old Miss andYoung Miss had died. And it had about broken Dimity Munroes heart.


But it served her right Ifshed had any gumption shed have caught her another man long ago, instead of waiting for Alexto get money enough to marry her.


Scarlett chattered cheerfully but there were many things about the County which shesuppressed,thingsthath(on) urt to think about. She had driven over the County with Will, trying not toremember when these thousands of fertile acres had stood green with cotton. Now, plantation afterplantation was going back to the forest and dismal fields of broomsedge, scrub oak and runty pineshad grown stealthily about silent ruins and over old cotton fields. Only one acre was being farmednow where once a hundred had been under the plow. It was like moving through a dead land.


This section wont come back for fifty yearsif it ever comes back, Will had said. Taras the best farm in the County, thanks to you and me, Scarlett, but its a farm, a two-mule farm, not aplantation. And the Fontaine place, it comes next to Tare and then the Tarletons. They aint makin


much money but theyre getting along and they got gumption. But most of the rest of the folks,the rest of the farms


No, Scarlett did not like to remember the way the deserted County looked. It seemed evensadder, in retrospect beside the bustle and prosperity of Atlanta.


Has anything happened here? she asked when they were finally home and were seated on thefront porch. She had talked rapidly and continuously all the way home, fearing that a silence wouldfall. She had not had a word alone with Rhett since that day when she fell down the steps and shewas none too anxious to be alone with him now. She did not know how he felt toward her. He hadbeen kindness itself during her miserable convalescence, but it was the kindness of an impersonalstranger. He had anticipated her wants, kept the children from bothering her and supervised thestore and the mills. But he had never said: Im sorry. Well, perhaps he wasnt sorry. Perhaps hestill thought that child that was never born was not his child. How could she tell what went on inthe mind behind the bland dark face?


But he had showed a disposition to be courteous, for the firsttime in their married life, and a desire to let life go on as though there had never been anythingunpleasant between themas though, thought Scarlett cheerlessly, as though there had never beenanything at all between them. Well, if that was what he wanted, she could act her part too.


Is everything all right? she repeated. Did you get the new shingles for the store? Did youswap the mules? For Heavens sake, Rhett, take those feathers out of your hat. You look a fool andyoull be likely to wear them downtown without remembering to take them out.


No, said Bonnie, picking up her fathers hat defensively.


Everything has gone very well here, replied Rhett. Bonnie and I have had a nice time and Idont believe her hair has been combed since you left. Dont suck the feathers, darling, they maybe nasty. Yes, the shingles are fixed and I got a good trade on the mules. No, theres really nonews. Everything has been quite dull.


Then, as an afterthought he added: The honorable Ashley was over here last night. He wantedto know if I thought you would sell him your mill and the part interest you have in his.


Scarlett who had been rocking and fanning herself with a turkey tail fan, stopped abruptly.


Sell? Where on earth did Ashley get the money? You know they never have a cent. Melaniespends it as fast as he makes it.


Rhett shrugged. I always thought her a frugal little person, but then Im not as well informedabout the intimate details of the Wilkes family as you seem to be.


That jab seemed in something of Rhetts old style and Scarlett grew annoyed.


Run away, dear, she said to Bonnie. Mother wants to talk to Father.


No, said Bonnie positively and climbed upon Rhetts lap.


Scarlett frowned at her child and Bonnie scowled back in so complete a resemblance to GeraldOHara that Scarlett almost laughed.


Let her stay, said Rhett comfortably. As to where he got the money, it seems it was sent himby someone he nursed through a case of smallpox at Rock Island. It renews my faith in humannature to know that gratitude still exists.


Who was it? Anyone we know?


The letter was unsigned and came from Washington. Ashley was at a loss to know who couldhave sent it. But then, one of Ashleys unselfish temperament goes about the world doing so manygood deeds that you cant expect him to remember all of them.


Had she not been so surprised at Ashleys windfall, Scarlett would have taken up this gauntlet,although while at Tara she had decided that never again would she permit herself to be involved inany quarrel with Rhett about Ashley. The ground on which she stood in this matter was entirely toouncertain and, until she knew exactly where she stood with both men, she did not care to be drawnout.


He wants to buy me out?


Yes. But Of course, I told him you wouldnt sell.


I wish youd let me mind my own business.


Well, you know you wouldnt part with the mills. I told him that he knew as well as I did thatyou couldnt bear not to have your finger in everybodys pie, and if you sold out to him, then youwouldnt be able to tell him how to mind his own business.


You dared say that to him about me?


Why not? Its true, isnt it? I believe he heartily agreed with me but of course, he was too muchof a gentleman to come right out and say so.


Its a lie! I will sell them to him! cried Scarlett angrily.


Until that moment, she had had no idea of parting with the mills. She had several reasons forwanting to keep them and their monetary value was the least reason. She could have sold them forlarge sums any time in the last few years, but she had refused all offers. The mills were the tangibleevidence of what she had done, unaided and against great odds, and she was proud of them and ofherself. Most of all, she did not want to sell them because they were the only path that lay open toAshley. If the mills went from her control it would mean that she would seldom see Ashley andprobably never see him alone. And she had to see him alone. She could not go on this way anylonger, wondering what his feelings toward her were now, wondering if all his love had died inshame since the dreadful night of Melanies party.


In the course of business she could find manyopportune times for conversations without it appearing to anyone that she was seeking him out.


And, given time, she knew she could gain back whatever ground she had lost in his heart. But ifshe sold the millsNo, she did not want to sell but, goaded by the thought that Rhett had exposed her to Ashley inso truthful and so unflattering a light, she had made up her mind instantly. Ashley should have themills and at a price so low he could not help realizing how generous she was.


I will sell! she cried furiously. Now, what do you think of that?


There was the faintest gleam of triumph in Rhetts eyes as he bent to tie Bonnies shoe string.


I think youll regret it, he said.


Already she was regretting the hasty words. Had they been spoken to anyone save Rhett shewould have shamelessly retracted them. Why had she burst out like that? She looked at Rhett withan angry frown and saw that he was watching her with his old keen, cat-at-a-mouse-hole look.


When he saw her frown, he laughed suddenly, his white teeth flashing. Scarlett had an uncertainfeeling that he had jockeyed her into this position.


Did you have anything to do with this? she snapped.


I? His brows went up in mock surprise. You should know me better. I never go about theworld doing good deeds if I can avoid it.


That night she sold the mills and all her interest in them to Ashley. She did not lose thereby forAshley refused to take advantage of her first low offer and met the highest bid that she had everhad for them. When she had signed the papers and the mills were irrevocably gone and Melaniewas passing small glasses of wine to Ashley and Rhett to celebrate the transaction, Scarlett feltbereft as though she had sold one of her children.


The mills had been her darlings, her pride, the fruit of her small grasping hands. She had startedwith one little mill in those black days when Atlanta was barely struggling up from ruin and ashesand want was staring her in the face. She had fought and schemed and nursed them through thedark times when Yankee confiscation loomed, when money was tight and smart men going to thewall. And now when Atlanta was covering its scars and buildings were going up everywhere andnewcomers flocking to the town every day, she had two fine mills, two lumber yards, a dozen muleteams and convict labor to operate the business at low cost Bidding farewell to them was likeclosing a door forever on a part of her life, a bitter, harsh part but one which she recalled with anostalgic satisfaction.


She had built up this business and now she had sold it and she was oppressed with the certaintythat, without her at the helm, Ashley would lose it alleverything that she had worked to build.


Ashley trusted everyone and still hardly knew a two-by-four from a six-by-eight. And now shewould never be able to give him the benefit of her adviceall because Rhett had told him that sheliked to boss everything.


Oh, damn Rhett! she thought and as she watched him the conviction grew that he was at thebottom of all this. Just how and why she did not know. He was talking to Ashley and his wordsbrought her up sharply.


I suppose youll turn the convicts back right away, he said.


Turn the convicts back? Why should there be any idea of turning them back? Rhett knewperfectly well that the large profits from the mills grew out of the cheap convict labor. And whydid Rhett speak with such certainty about what Ashleys future actions would be? What did heknow of him?


Yes, theyll go back immediately, replied Ashley and he avoided Scarletts dumbfounded gaze.


Have you lost your mind? she cried. Youll lose all the money on the lease and what kind oflabor can you get, anyway?


Ill use free darkies, said Ashley.


Free darkies! Fiddle-dee-dee! You know what their wages will cost and besides youll have theYankees on your neck every minute to see if youre giving them chicken three times a day andtucking them to sleep under eiderdown quilts. And if you give a lazy darky a couple of licks tospeed him up, youll hear the Yankees scream from here to Dalton and youll end up in jail. Why,convicts are the only


Melanie looked down into her lap at her twisted hands. Ashley looked unhappy but obdurate.


For a moment he was silent Then his gaze crossed Rhetts and it was as if he found understandingand encouragement in Rhetts eyesa glance that was not lost on Scarlett.


I wont work convicts, Scarlett, he said quietly.


Well, sir! her breath was taken away. And why not? Are you afraid people will talk about youlike they do about me?


Ashley raised his head.


Im not afraid of what people say as long as Im right. And I have never felt that convict laborwas right.


But why


I cant make money from the enforced labor and misery of others.


But you owned slaves!


They werent miserable. And besides, Id have freed them all when Father died if the warhadnt already freed them. But this is different, Scarlett. The system is open to too many abuses.


Perhaps you dont know it but I do. I know very well that Johnnie Gallegher has killed at least oneman at his camp. Maybe morewho cares about one convict, more or less? He said the man waskilled trying to escape, but thats not what Ive heard elsewhere. And I know he works men whoare too sick to work. Call it superstition, but I do not believe that happiness can come from moneymade from the sufferings of others.


Gods nightgown! You meangoodness, Ashley, you didnt swallow all the ReverendWallaces bellowings about tainted money?


I didnt have to swallow it I believed it long before he preached on it.


Then, you must think all my money is tainted, cried Scarlett beginning to be angry. Because Iworked convicts and own saloon property and She stopped short. Both the Wilkes lookedembarrassed and Rhett was grinning broadly. Damn him, thought Scarlett, vehemently. Hesthinking that Im sticking my finger in other peoples pies again and so is Ashley. Id like to cracktheir heads together! She swallowed her wrath and tried to assume an aloof air of dignity but withlittle success.


Of course, its immaterial to me, she said.


Scarlett, dont think Im criticizing you! Im not. Its just that we look at things in differentways and what is good for you might not be good for me.


She suddenly wished that they were alone, wished ardently that Rhett and Melanie were at theend of the earth, so she could cry out: But I want to look at things the way you look at them! Tellme just what you mean, so I can understand and be like you!


But with Melanie present, trembling with the distress of the scene, and Rhett lounging, grinningat her, she could only say with as much coolness and offended virtue as she could muster: Imsure its your own business, Ashley, and far be it from me to tell you how to run it. But, I must say,I do not understand your attitude or your remarks.


Oh, if they were only alone, so she would not be forced to say these cool things to him, thesewords that were making him unhappy!


Ive offended you, Scarlett, and I did not mean to. You must believe me and forgive me. Thereis nothing enigmatic in what I said. It is only that I believe that money which comes in certainways seldom brings happiness.


But youre wrong! she cried, unable to restrain herself any longer. Look at me! You knowhow my money came. You know how things were before I made my money! You remember thatwinter at Tara when it was so cold and we were cutting up the carpets for shoes and there wasntenough to eat and we used to wonder how we were going to give Beau and Wade an education.


You remem


I remember, said Ashley tiredly, but Id rather forget.


Well, you cant say any of us were happy then, can you? And look at us now! Youve a nicehome and a good future. And has anyone a prettier house than mine or nicer clothes or finerhorses? Nobody sets as fine a table as me or gives nicer receptions and my children have everythingthey want. Well, how did I get the money to make it possible? Off trees? No, sir! Convictsand saloon rentals and


And dont forget murdering that Yankee, said Rhett softly. He really gave you your start.


Scarlett swung on him, furious words on her lips.


And the money has made you very, very happy, hasnt it, darling? he asked, poisonouslysweet.


Scarlett stopped short, her mouth open, and her eyes went swiftly to the eyes of the other three.


Melanie was almost crying with embarrassment, Ashley was suddenly bleak and withdrawn andRhett was watching her over his cigar with impersonal amusement. She started to cry out: But ofcourse, its made me happy!


But somehow, she could not speak.


"""----""""----""


----"----"


""--------"


"""--------"""


"""""""----"""""""----"""


"""""----"


--------""


----"""----"----"""----"


"""----""""----""""