Chapter 16


JANUARY AND FEBRUARY OF 1864 PASSED, full of cold rains and wild winds, clouded bypervasive gloom and depression. In addition to the defeats at Gettysburg and Vicksburg, the centerof the Southern line had caved. After hard fighting, nearly all of Tennessee was now held by theUnion troops. But even with this loss on the top of the others, the Souths spirit was not broken.


True, grim determination had taken the place of high-hearted hopes, but people could still find asilver lining in the cloud. For one thing, the Yankees had been stoutly repulsed in September whenthey had tried to follow up their victories in Tennessee by an advance into Georgia.


Here in the northwesternmost corner of the state, at Chickamauga, serious fighting had occurredon Georgia soil for the first time since the war began. The Yankees had taken Chattanooga andthen had marched through the mountain passes into Georgia, but they had been driven back withheavy losses.


Atlanta and its railroads had played a big part in making Chickamauga a great victory for theSouth. Over the railroads that led down from Virginia to Atlanta and then northward to Tennessee,General Longstreets corps had been rushed to the scene of the battle. Along the entire route ofseveral hundred miles, the tracks had been cleared and all the available rolling stock in theSoutheast had been assembled for the movement.


Atlanta had watched while train after train rolled through the town, hour after hour, passengercoaches, box cars, flat cars, filled with shouting men. They had come without food or sleep,without their horses, ambulances or supply trains and, without waiting for the rest, they had leapedfrom the trains and into the battle. And the Yankees had been driven out of Georgia, back into Tennessee.


It was the greatest feat of the war, and Atlanta took pride and personal satisfaction in the thoughtthat its railroads had made the victory possible.


But the South had needed the cheering news from Chickamauga to strengthen its morale throughthe winter. No one denied now that the Yankees were good fighters and, at last, they had goodgenerals. Grant was a butcher who did not care how many men he slaughtered for a victory, butvictory he would have. Sheridan was a name to bring dread to Southern hearts. And, then, therewas a man named Sherman who was being mentioned more and more often. He had risen toprominence in the campaigns in Tennessee and the West, and his reputation as a determined andruthless fighter was growing.


None of them, of course, compared with General Lee. Faith in the General and the army wasstill strong. Confidence in ultimate victory never wavered. But the war was dragging out so long.


There were so many dead, so many wounded and maimed for life, so many widowed, so manyorphaned. And there was still a long struggle ahead, which meant more dead, more wounded, morewidows and orphans.


To make matters worse, a vague distrust of those in high places had begun to creep over thecivilian population. Many newspapers were outspoken in their denunciation of President Davishimself and the manner in which he prosecuted the war. There were dissensions within theConfederate cabinet, disagreements between President Davis and his generals. The currency wasfalling rapidly. Shoes and clothing for the army were scarce, ordnance supplies and drugs werescarcer. The railroads needed new cars to take the place of old ones and new iron rails to replacethose torn up by the Yankees. The generals in the field were crying out for fresh troops, and therewere fewer and fewer fresh troops to be had. Worst of all, some of the state governors, GovernorBrown of Georgia among them, were refusing to send state militia troops and arms out of theirborders.


There were thousands of able-bodied men in the state troops for whom the army was frantic, but the government pleaded for them in vain.


With the new fall of currency, prices soared again. Beef, pork and butter cost thirty-five dollars apound, flour fourteen hundred dollars a barrel, soda one hundred dollars a pound, tea five hundreddollars a pound. Warm clothing, when it was obtainable at all, had risen to such prohibitive pricesthat Atlanta ladies were lining their old dresses with rags and reinforcing them with newspapers tokeep out the wind. Shoes cost from two hundred to eight hundred dollars a pair, depending onwhether they were made of cardboard or real leather. Ladies now wore gaiters made of their oldwool shawls and cut-up carpets. The soles were made of wood.


The truth was that the North was holding the South in a virtual state of siege, though many didnot realize it. The Yankee gunboats had tightened the mesh at the ports and very few ships werenow able to slip past the blockade.


The South had always lived by selling cotton and buying the things it did not produce, but nowit could neither sell nor buy. Gerald OHara had three years crops of cotton stored under the shednear the gin house at Tara, but little good it did him. In Liverpool it would bring one hundred andfifty thousand dollars, but there was no hope of getting it to Liverpool. Gerald had changed from awealthy man to a man who was wondering how he would feed his family and his negroes throughthe winter.


Throughout the South, most of the cotton planters were in the same fix. With the blockadeclosing tighter and tighter, there was no way to get the Souths money crop to its market inEngland, no way to bring in the necessaries which cotton money had brought in years gone by.


And the agricultural South, waging war with the industrial North, was needing so many thingsnow, things it had never thought of buying in times of peace.


It was a situation made to order for speculators and profiteers, and men were not lacking to takeadvantage of it. As food and clothing grew scarcer and prices rose higher and higher, the publicoutcry against the speculators grew louder and more venomous. In those early days of 1864, nonewspaper could be opened that did not carry scathing editorials denouncing the speculators asvultures and bloodsucking leeches and calling upon the government to put them down with a hardhand. The government did its best, but the efforts came to nothing, for the government was harriedby many things.


Against no one was feeling more bitter than against Rhett Butler. He had sold his boats whenblockading grew too hazardous, and he was now openly engaged in food speculation. The storiesabout him that came back to Atlanta from Richmond and Wilmington made those who hadreceived him in other days writhe with shame.


In spite of all these trials and tribulations, Atlantas ten thousand population had grown todouble that number during the war. Even the blockade had added to Atlantas prestige. From timeimmemorial, the coast cities had dominated the South, commercially and otherwise. But now withthe ports closed and many of the port cities captured or besieged, the Souths salvation dependedupon itself. The interior section was what counted, if the South was going to win the war, andAtlanta was now the center of things. The people of the town were suffering hardship, privation,sickness and death as severely as the rest of the Confederacy; but Atlanta, the city, had gainedrather than lost as a result of the war. Atlanta, the heart of the Confederacy, was still beating full and strong, the railroads that were its arteries throbbing with the never-ending flow of men,munitions and supplies.


In other days, Scarlett would have been bitter about her shabby dresses and patched shoes butnow she did not care, for the one person who mattered was not there to see her. She was happythose two months, happier than she had been in years. Had she not felt the start of Ashleys heartwhen her arms went round his neck? seen that despairing look on his face which was more open anavowal than any words could be? He loved her. She was sure of that now, and this conviction wasso pleasant she could even be kinder to Melanie. She could be sorry for Melanie now, sorry with afaint contempt for her blindness, her stupidity.


When the war is over! she thought When its overthen ...


Sometimes she thought with a small dart of fear: What then? But she put the thought from hermind. When the war was over, everything would be settled, somehow. If Ashley loved her, hesimply couldnt go on living with Melanie.


But then, a divorce was unthinkable; and Ellen and Gerald, staunch Catholics that they were,would never permit her to marry a divorced man. It would mean leaving the Church! Scarlettthought it over and decided that, in a choice between the Church and Ashley, she would chooseAshley. But, oh, it would make such a scandal! Divorced people were under the ban not only of theChurch but of society. No divorced person was received. However, she would dare even that forAshley. She would sacrifice anything for Ashley.


Somehow it would come out all right when the war was over. If Ashley loved her so much, hedfind a way. Shed make him find a way. And with every day that passed, she became more sure inher own mind of his devotion, more certain he would arrange matters satisfactorily when theYankees were finally beaten. Of course, he had said the Yankees had them. Scarlett thought thatwas just foolishness. He had been tired and upset when he said it. But she hardly cared whether theYankees won or not. The thing that mattered was for the war to finish quickly and for Ashley tocome home.


Then, when the sleets of March were keeping everyone indoors, the hideous blow fell. Melanie,her eyes shining with joy, her head ducked with embarrassed pride, told her she was going to havea baby.


Dr. Meade says it will be here in late August or September, she said. Ive thoughtbut Iwasnt sure till today. Oh, Scarlett, isnt it wonderful? Ive so envied you Wade and so wanted ababy. And I was so afraid that maybe I wasnt ever going to have one and, darling, I want adozen!


Scarlett had been combing her hair, preparing for bed, when Melanie spoke and she stopped, thecomb in mid-air.


Dear God! she said and, for a moment, realization did not come. Then there suddenly leapedto her mind the closed door of Melanies bedroom and a knifelike pain went through her, a pain asfierce as though Ashley had been her own husband and had been unfaithful to her. A baby. Ashleysbaby. Oh, how could he, when he loved her and not Melanie?


I know youre surprised, Melanie rattled on, breathlessly. And isnt it too wonderful? Oh,Scarlett, I dont know how I shall ever write Ashley! It wouldnt be so embarrassing if I could tellhim ororwell, not say anything and just let him notice gradually, you know


Dear God! said Scarlett, almost sobbing, as she dropped the comb and caught at the marbletop of the dresser for support.


Darling, dont look like that! You know having a baby isnt so bad. You said so yourself. Andyou mustnt worry about me, though you are sweet to be so upset. Of course, Dr. Meade said I waswas, Melanie blushed, quite narrow but that perhaps I shouldnt have any trouble andScarlett, did you write Charlie and tell him when you found out about Wade, or did your mother doit or maybe Mr. OHara? Oh, dear, if I only had a mother to do it! I just dont see how


Hush! said Scarlett, violently. Hush!


Oh, Scarlett, Im so stupid! Im sorry. I guess all happy people are selfish. I forgot aboutCharlie, just for the moment


Hush! said Scarlett again, fighting to control her face and make her emotions quiet. Never,never must Melanie see or suspect how she felt.


Melanie, the most tactful of women, had tears in her eyes at her own cruelty. How could shehave brought back to Scarlett the terrible memories of Wade being born months after poor Charliewas dead? How could she have been so thoughtless?


Let me help you undress, dearest, she said humbly. And Ill rub your head for you.


You leave me alone, said Scarlett, her face like stone. And Melanie, bursting into tears of self-condemnation, fled the room, leaving Scarlett to a tearless bed, with wounded pride,disillusionment and jealousy for bedfellows.


She thought that she could not live any longer in the same house with the woman who wascarrying Ashleys child, thought that she would go home to Tara, home, where she belonged. Shedid not see how she could ever look at Melanie again and not have her secret read in her face. Andshe arose the next morning with the fixed intention of packing her trunk immediately afterbreakfast. But, as they sat at the table, Scarlett silent and gloomy, Pitty bewildered and Melaniemiserable, a telegram came.


It was to Melanie from Ashleys body servant, Mose.


I have looked everywhere and I cant find him. Must I come home?


No one knew what it meant but the eyes of the three women went to one another, wide withterror, and Scarlett forgot all thoughts of going home. Without finishing their breakfasts they drovedown to telegraph Ashleys colonel, but even as they entered the office, there was a telegram fromhim.


Regret to inform you Major Wilkes missing since scouting expedition three days ago. Will keepyou informed.


It was a ghastly trip home, with Aunt Pitty crying into her handkerchief, Melanie sitting erectand white and Scarlett slumped, stunned in the corner of the carriage. Once in the house, Scarlett stumbled up the stairs to her bedroom and, clutching her Rosary from the table, dropped to herknees and tried to pray. But the prayers would not come. There only fell on her an abysmal fear, acertain knowledge that God had turned His face from her for her sin. She had loved a married manand tried to take him from his wife, and God had punished her by killing him. She wanted to praybut she could not raise her eyes to Heaven. She wanted to cry but the tears would not come. Theyseemed to flood her chest, and they were hot tears that burned under her bosom, but they wouldnot flow.


Her door opened and Melanie entered. Her face was like a heart cut from white paper, framedagainst black hair, and her eyes were wide, like those of a frightened child lost in the dark.


Scarlett, she said, putting out her hands. You must forgive me for what I said yesterday, foryoureall Ive got now. Oh, Scarlett, I know my darling is dead!


Somehow, she was in Scarletts arms, her small breasts heaving with sobs, and somehow theywere lying on the bed, holding each other close, and Scarlett was crying too, crying with her facepressed close against Melanies, the tears of one wetting the cheeks of the other. It hurt so terriblyto cry, but not so much as not being able to cry. Ashley is deaddead, she thought, and I havekilled him by loving him! Fresh sobs broke from her, and Melanie somehow feeling comfort in hertears tightened her arms about her neck.


At least, she whispered, at leastIve got his baby.


And I, thought Scarlett, too stricken now for anything so petty as jealousy, Ive got nothingnothingnothing except the look on his face when he told me good-by.


The first reports were Missingbelieved killed and so they appeared on the casualty list.


Melanie telegraphed Colonel Sloan a dozen times and finally a letter arrived, full of sympathy,explaining that Ashley and a squad had ridden out on a scouting expedition and had not returned.


There had been reports of a slight skirmish within the Yankee lines and Mose, frantic with grief,had risked his own life to search for Ashleys body but had found nothing. Melanie, strangely calmnow, telegraphed him money and instructions to come home.


When Missingbelieved captured appeared on the casualty lists, joy and hope reanimated thesad household. Melanie could hardly be dragged away from the telegraph office and she met everytrain hoping for letters. She was sick now, her pregnancy making itself felt in many unpleasantways, but she refused to obey Dr. Meades commands and stay in bed. A feverish energy possessedher and would not let her be still; and at night, long after Scarlett had gone to bed, she could hearher walking the floor in the next room.


One afternoon, she came home from town, driven by the frightened Uncle Peter and supportedby Rhett Butler. She had fainted at the telegraph office and Rhett, passing by and observing theexcitement, had escorted her home. He carried her up the stairs to her bedroom and while thealarmed household fled hither and you for hot bricks, blankets and whisky, he propped her on thepillows of her bed.


Mrs. Wilkes, he questioned abruptly, you are going to have a baby, are you not?


Had Melanie not been so faint, so sick, so heartsore, she would have collapsed at his question.


Even with women friends she was embarrassed by any mention of her condition, while visits to Dr.


Meade were agonizing experiences. And for a man, especially Rhett Butler, to ask such a questionwas unthinkable. But lying weak and forlorn in the bed, she could only nod. After she had nodded,it did not seem so dreadful, for he looked so kind and so concerned.


Then you must take better care of yourself. All this running about and worry wont help youand may harm the baby. If you will permit me, Mrs. Wilkes, I will use what influence I have inWashington to learn about Mr. Wilkes fate. If he is a prisoner, he will be on the Federal lists, and ifhe isntwell, theres nothing worse than uncertainty. But I must have your promise. Take care ofyourself or, before God, I wont turn a hand.


Oh, you are so kind, cried Melanie. How can people say such dreadful things about you?


Then overcome with the knowledge of her tactlessness and also with horror at having discussedher condition with a man, she began to cry weakly. And Scarlett, flying up the stairs with a hotbrick wrapped in flannel, found Rhett patting her hand.


He was as good as his word. They never knew what wires he pulled. They feared to ask,knowing it might involve an admission of his too close affiliations with the Yankees. It was amonth before he had news, news that raised them to the heights when they first heard it, but latercreated a gnawing anxiety In their hearts.


Ashley was not dead! He had been wounded and taken prisoner, and the records showed that hewas at Rock Island, a prison camp in Illinois. In their first joy, they could think of nothing exceptthat he was alive. But, when calmness began to return, they looked at one another and said RockIsland! in the same voice they would have said In Hell! For even as Andersonville was a namethat stank in the North, so was Rock Island one to bring terror to the heart of any Southerner whohad relatives imprisoned there.


When Lincoln refused to exchange prisoners, believing it would hasten the end of the war toburden the Confederacy with the feeding and guarding of Union prisoners, there were thousands ofbluecoats at Andersonville, Georgia. The Confederates on scant rations and practically withoutdrugsorbandagesfortheirownsickandwounded.(were) They had little to share with theprisoners. They fed their prisoners on what the soldiers in the field were eating, fat pork and driedpeas, and on this diet the Yankees died like flies, sometimes a hundred a day. Inflamed by thereports, the North resorted to harsher treatment of Confederate prisoners and at no place were conditionsworse than at Rock Island. Food was scanty, one blanket for three men, and the ravages ofsmallpox, pneumonia and typhoid gave the place the name of a pesthouse. Three-fourths of all themen sent there never came out alive.


And Ashley was in that horrible place! Ashley was alive but he was wounded and at RockIsland, and the snow must have been deep in Illinois when he was taken there. Had he died of hiswound, since Rhett had learned his news? Had he fallen victim to smallpox? Was he delirious withpneumonia and no blanket to cover him?


Oh, Captain Butler, isnt there some way Cant you use your influence and have himexchanged? cried Melanie.


Mr. Lincoln, the merciful and just, who cries large tears over Mrs. Bixbys five boys, hasntany tears to shed about the thousands of Yankees dying at Andersonville, said Rhett, his mouthtwisting. He doesnt care if they all die. The order is out. No exchanges. II hadnt told youbefore, Mrs. Wilkes, but your husband had a chance to get out and refused it.


Oh, no! cried Melanie in disbelief.


Yes, indeed. The Yankees are recruiting men for frontier service to fight the Indians, recruitingthem from among Confederate prisoners. Any prisoner who will take the oath of allegiance andenlist for Indian service for two years will be released and sent West. Mr. Wilkes refused.


Oh, how could he? cried Scarlett Why didnt he take the oath and then desert and come homeas soon as he got out of jail?


Melanie turned on her like a small fury.


How can you even suggest that he would do such a thing? Betray his own Confederacy bytaking that vile oath and then betray his word to the Yankees! I would rather know he was dead atRock Island than hear he had taken that oath. Id be proud of him if he died in prison. But if he didthat, I would never look on his face again. Never! Of course, he refused.


When Scarlett was seeing Rhett to the door, she asked indignantly: If it were you, wouldnt youenlist with the Yankees to keep from dying in that place and then desert?


Of course, said Rhett, his teeth showing beneath his mustache.


Then why didnt Ashley do it?


Hes a gentleman, said Rhett, and Scarlett wondered how it was possible to convey suchcynicism and contempt in that one honorable word.


""--------""


----""--------"""


""--------


""----""--------"----