Chapter 19


IN THOSE FIRST DAYS of the siege, when the Yankees crashed here and there against thedefenses of the city, Scarlett was so frightened by the bursting shells she could only cowerhelplessly, her hands over her ears, expecting every moment to be blown into eternity. When sheheard the whistling screams that heralded their approach, she rushed to Melanies room and flungherself on the bed beside her, and the two clutched each other, screaming Oh! Oh! as they buriedtheir heads in the pillows. Prissy and Wade scurried for the cellar and crouched in the cob-webbeddarkness, Prissy squalling at the top of her voice and Wade sobbing and hiccoughing.


Suffocating under feather pillows while death screamed overhead, Scarlett silently cursedMelanie for keeping her from the safer regions below stairs. But the doctor had forbidden Melanieto walk and Scarlett had to stay with her. Added to her terror of being blown to pieces was herequally active terror that Melanies baby might arrive at any moment. Sweat broke out on Scarlettwith clammy dampness, whenever this thought entered her mind. What would she do if the babystarted coming? She knew shed rather let Melanie die than go out on the streets to hunt for thedoctor when the shells were falling like April rain. And she knew Prissy could be beaten to deathbefore she would venture forth. What would she do if the baby came?


These matters she discussed with Prissy in whispers one evening, as they prepared Melaniessupper tray, and Prissy, surprisingly enough, calmed her fears.


Miss Scarlett, effen we kain git de doctah wen Miss Mellys time come, doan you bodder. Ahkin manage. Ah knows all bout birthin. Ain mah ma a midwife? Ain she raise me ter be amidwife, too? Jes you leave it ter me.


Scarlett breathed more easily knowing that experienced hands were near, but she nevertheless yearned to have the ordeal over and done with. Mad to be away from exploding shells, desperate toget home to the quiet of Tara, she prayed every night that the baby would arrive the next day, soshe would be released from her promise and could leave Atlanta. Tara seemed so safe, so far awayfrom all this misery.


Scarlett longed for home and her mother as she had never longed for anything in all her life. Ifshe were just near Ellen she wouldnt be afraid, no matter what happened. Every night after a dayof screeching ear-splitting shells, she went to bed determined to tell Melanie the next morning thatshe could not stand Atlanta another day, that she would have to go home and Melanie would haveto go to Mrs. Meades. But, as she lay on her pillow, there always rose the memory of Ashleysface as it had looked when she last saw him, drawn as with an inner pain but with a little smile onhis lips: Youll take care of Melanie, wont you? Youre so strong.  Promise me. And she hadpromised. Somewhere, Ashley lay dead. Wherever he was, he was watching her, holding her tothat promise. Living or dead, she could not fail him, no matter what the cost. So she remained dayafter day.


In response to Ellens letters, pleading with her to come home, she wrote minimizing thedangers of the siege, explaining Melanies predicament and promising to come as soon as the babywas born. Ellen, sensitive to the bonds of kin, be they blood or marriage, wrote back reluctantlyagreeing that she must stay but demanding Wade and Prissy be sent home immediately. Thissuggestion met with the complete approval of Prissy, who was now reduced to teeth-chatteringidiocy at every unexpected sound. She spent so much time crouching in the cellar that the girlswould have fared badly but for Mrs. Meades stolid old Betsy.


Scarlett was as anxious as her mother to have Wade out of Atlanta, not only for the childssafety, but because his constant fear irritated her. Wade was terrified to speechlessness by theshelling, and even when lulls came he clung to Scarletts skirts, too terrified to cry. He was afraidto go to bed at night, afraid of the dark, afraid to sleep lest the Yankees should come and get him,and the sound of his soft nervous whimpering in the night grated unendurably on her nerves.


Secretly she was just as frightened as he was, but it angered her to be reminded of it every minuteby his tense, drawn face. Yes, Tara was the place for Wade. Prissy should take him there and returnimmediately to be present when the baby came.


But before Scarlett could start the two on their homeward journey, news came that the Yankeeshad swung to the south and were skirmishing along the railroad between Atlanta and Jonesboro.


Suppose the Yankees should capture the train on which Wade and Prissy were ridingScarlett andMelanie turned pale at the thought, for everyone knew that Yankee atrocities on helpless childrenwere even more dreadful than on women. So she feared to send him home and he remained inAtlanta, a frightened, silent little ghost, pattering about desperately after his mother, fearing tohave her skirt out of his hand for even a minute.


The siege went on through the hot days of July, thundering days following nights of sullen,ominous stillness, and the town began to adjust itself. It was as though, the worst having happened,they had nothing more to fear. They had feared a siege and now they had a siege and, after all, itwasnt so bad. Life could and did go on almost as usual. They knew they were sitting on a volcano,but until that volcano erupted there was nothing they could do. So why worry now? And probablyit wouldnt erupt anyway. Just look how General Hood is holding the Yankees out of the city! And see how the cavalry is holding the railroad to Macon! Sherman will never take it!


But for all their apparent insouciance in the face of falling shells and shorter rations, for all theirignoring the Yankees, barely half a mile away, and for all their boundless confidence in the raggedline of gray men in the rifle pits, there pulsed, just below the skin of Atlanta, a wild uncertaintyover what the next day would bring. Suspense, worry, sorrow, hunger and the torment of rising,falling, rising hope was wearing that skin thin.


Gradually, Scarlett drew courage from the brave faces of her friends and from the mercifuladjustment which nature makes when what cannot be cured must be endured. To be sure, she stilljumped at the sound of explosions but she did not run screaming to burrow her head underMelanies pillow. She could now gulp and say weakly: That was close, wasnt it?


She was less frightened also because life had taken on the quality of a dream, a dream tooterrible to be real. It wasnt possible that she, Scarlett OHara, should be in such a predicament,with the danger of death about her every hour, every minute. It wasnt possible that the quiet tenorof life could have changed so completely in so short a time.


It was unreal, grotesquely unreal, that morning skies which dawned so tenderly blue could beprofaned with cannon smoke that hung over the town like low thunder clouds, that warm noontidesfilled with the piercing sweetness of massed honeysuckle and climbing roses could be so fearful,as shells screamed into the streets, bursting like the crack of doom, throwing iron splintershundreds of yards, blowing people and animals to bits.


Quiet, drowsy afternoon siestas had ceased to be, for though the clamor of battle might lull fromtime to time, Peachtree Street was alive, and noisy at all hours, cannon and ambulances rumblingby, wounded stumbling in from the rifle pits, regiments hurrying past at double-quick, orderedfrom the ditches on one side of town to the defense of some hard-pressed earthworks on the other,and couriers dashing headlong down the street toward headquarters as though the fate of theConfederacy hung on them.


The hot nights brought a measure of quiet but it was a sinister quiet. When the night was still, itwas too stillas though the tree frogs, katydids and sleepy mockingbirds were too frightened toraise their voices in the usual summer-night chorus. Now and again, the quiet was broken sharplyby the crack-cracking of musket fire in the last line of defenses.


Often in the late night hours, when the lamps were out and Melanie asleep and deathly silencepressed over the town, Scarlett, lying awake, heard the latch of the front gate click and soft urgenttappings on the front door.


Always, faceless soldiers stood on the dark porch and from the darkness many different voicesspoke to her. Sometimes a cultured voice came from the shadows: Madam, my abject apologiesfor disturbing you, but could I have water for myself and my horse? Sometimes it was the hardburring of a mountain voice, sometimes the odd nasals of the flat Wiregrass country to the farsouth, occasionally the lulling drawl of the Coast that caught at her heart, reminding her of Ellensvoice.


Missy, I got a pardner here who I wuz aimin ter git ter the horsepittle but looks like he aintgoin ter last that fer. Kin you take him in?


Lady, I shore could do with some vittles. Id shore relish a corn pone if it didnt deprive younone.


Madam, forgive my intrusion butcould I spend the night on your porch? I saw the roses andsmelled the honeysuckle and it was so much like home that I was emboldened


No, these nights were not real! They were a nightmare and the men were part of that nightmare,men without bodies or faces, only tired voices speaking to her from the warm dark. Draw water,serve food, lay pillows on the front porch, bind wounds, hold the dirty heads of the dying. No, thiscould not be happening to her!


Once, late in July, it was Uncle Henry Hamilton who came tapping in the night. Uncle Henrywas minus his umbrella and carpetbag now, and his fat stomach as well. The skin of his pink fatface hung down in loose folds like the dewlaps of a bulldog and his long white hair was indescribablydirty. He was almost barefoot, crawling with lice, and he was hungry, but his irasciblespirit was unimpaired.


Despite his remark: Its a foolish war when old fools like me are out toting guns, the girlsreceived the impression that Uncle Henry was enjoying himself. He was needed, like the youngmen, and he was doing a young mans work. Moreover, he could keep up with the young men,which was more than Grandpa Merriwether could do, he told them gleefully. Grandpas lumbagowas troubling him greatly and the Captain wanted to discharge him. But Grandpa wouldnt gohome. He said frankly that he preferred the Captains swearing and bullying to his daughter-inlawscoddling, and her incessant demands that he give up chewing tobacco and launder his beardevery day.


Uncle Henrys visit was brief, for he had only a four-hour furlough and he needed half of it forthe long walk in from the breastworks and back.


Girls, Im not going to see you all for a while, he announced as he sat in Melanies bedroom,luxuriously wriggling his blistered feet in the tub of cold water Scarlett had set before him. Ourcompany is going out in the morning.


Where? questioned Melanie frightened, clutching his arm.


Dont put your hand on me, said Uncle Henry irritably. Im crawling with lice. War would bea picnic if it wasnt for lice and dysentery. Wherem I going? Well, I havent been told but Ive gota good idea. Were marching south, toward Jonesboro, in the morning, unless Im greatly in error.


Oh, why toward Jonesboro?


Because theres going to be big fighting there, Missy. The Yankees are going to take therailroad if they possibly can. And if they do take it, its good-by Atlanta!


Oh, Uncle Henry, do you think they will?


Shucks, girls! No! How can they when Im there? Uncle Henry grinned at their frightenedfaces and then, becoming serious again: Its going to be a hard fight, girls. Weve got to win it.


You know, of course, that the Yankees have got all the railroads except the one to Macon, but thatisnt all theyve got. Maybe you girls didnt know it, but theyve got every road, too, every wagonlane and bridle path, except the McDonough road, Atlantas in a bag and the strings of the bag are at Jonesboro. And if the Yankees can take the railroad there, they can pull up the strings and haveus, just like a possum in a poke. So, we dont aim to let them get that railroad.  I may be gone awhile, girls. I just came in to tell you all good-by and to make sure Scarlett was still with you,Melly.


Of course, shes with me, said Melanie fondly. Dont you worry about us, Uncle Henry, anddo take care of yourself.


Uncle Henry wiped his wet feet on the rag rug and groaned as he drew on his tattered shoes.


I got to be going, he said. Ive got five miles to walk. Scarlett, you fix me up some kind oflunch to take. Anything youve got.


After he had kissed Melanie good-by, he went down to the kitchen where Scarlett was wrappinga corn pone and some apples in a napkin.


Uncle Henryis itis it really so serious?


Serious? Godlmighty, yes! Dont be a goose. Were in the last ditch.


Do you think theyll get to Tara?


Why began Uncle Henry, irritated at the feminine mind which thought only of personalthings when broad issues were involved. Then, seeing her frightened, woebegone face, he softened.


Of course they wont. Taras five miles from the railroad and its the railroad the Yankees want.


Youve got no more sense than a June bug, Missy. He broke off abruptly. I didnt walk all thisway here tonight just to tell you all good-by. I came to bring Melly some bad news, but when I gotup to it I just couldnt tell her. So Im going to leave it to you to do.


Ashley isntyou havent heard anythingthat hes dead?


Now, how would I be hearing about Ashley when Ive been standing in rifle pits up to the seatof my pants in mud? the old gentleman asked testily. No. Its about his father. John Wilkes isdead.


Scarlett sat down suddenly, the half-wrapped lunch in her hand.


I came to tell Mellybut I couldnt. You must do it And give her these.


He hauled from his pockets a heavy gold watch with dangling seals, a small miniature of thelong dead Mrs. Wilkes and a pair of massive cuff buttons. At the sight of the watch which she hadseen in John Wilkes hands a thousand times, the full realization came over Scarlett that Ashleysfather was really dead. And she was too stunned to cry or to speak. Uncle Henry fidgeted, coughedand did not look at her, lest he catch sight of a tear that would upset him.


He was a brave man, Scarlett. Tell Melly that. Tell her to write it to his girls. And a goodsoldier for all his years. A shell got him. Came right down on him and his horse. Tore the horsesI shot the horse myself, poor creature. A fine little mare she was. Youd better write Mrs. Tarletonabout that, too. She set a store on that mare. Wrap up my lunch, child. I must be going. There, dear,dont take it so hard. What better way can an old man die than doing a young mans work?


Oh, he shouldnt have died! He shouldnt have ever gone to the war. He should have lived and seen his grandchild grow up and died peacefully in bed. Oh, why did he go? He didnt believe insecession and he hated the war and


Plenty of us think that way, but what of it? Uncle Henry blew his nose grumpily. Do youthink I enjoy letting Yankee riflemen use me for a target at my age? But theres no other choice fora gentleman these days. Kiss me good-by, child, and dont worry about me. Ill come through thiswar safely.


Scarlett kissed him and heard him go down the steps into the dark, heard the latch click on thefront gate. She stood for a minute looking at the keepsakes in her hand. And then she went up thestairs to tell Melanie.


At the end of July came the unwelcome news, predicted by Uncle Henry, that the Yankees hadswung around again toward Jonesboro. They had cut the railroad four miles below the town, butthey had been beaten off by the Confederate cavalry; and the engineering corps, sweating in thebroiling sun, had repaired the line.


Scarlett was frantic with anxiety. For three days she waited, fear growing in her heart. Then areassuring letter came from Gerald. The enemy had not reached Tara. They had heard the sound ofthe fight but they had seen no Yankees.


Geralds letter was so full of brag and bluster as to how the Yankees had been driven from therailroad that one would have thought he personally had accomplished the feat, single handed. Hewrote for three pages about the gallantry of the troops and then, at the end of his letter, mentionedbriefly that Carreen was ill. The typhoid, Mrs. OHara said it was. She was not very ill and Scarlettwas not to worry about her, but on no condition must she come home now, even if the railroadshould become safe. Mrs. OHara was very glad now that Scarlett and Wade had not come homewhen the siege began. Mrs. OHara said Scarlett must go to church and say some Rosaries forCarreens recovery.


Scarletts conscience smote her at this last, for it had been months since she had been to church.


Once she would have thought this omission a mortal sin but, somehow, staying away from churchdid not seem so sinful now as it formerly had. But she obeyed her mother and going to her roomgabbled a hasty Rosary. When she rose from her knees she did not feel as comforted as she hadformerly felt after prayer. For some time she had felt that God was not watching out for her, theConfederates or the South, in spite of the millions of prayers ascending to Him daily.


That night she sat on the front porch with Geralds letter in her bosom where she could touch itoccasionally and bring Tara and Ellen closer to her. The lamp in the parlor window threw oddgolden shadows onto the dark vine-shrouded porch, and the matted tangle of yellow climbing rosesand honeysuckle made a wall of mingled fragrance about her. The night was utterly still. Not eventhe crack of a rifle had sounded since sunset and the world seemed far away. Scarlett rocked backand forth, lonely, miserable since reading the news from Tara, wishing that someone, anyone, evenMrs. Merriwether, were with her. But Mrs. Merriwether was on night duty at the hospital, Mrs.


Meade was at home making a feast for Phil, who was in from the front lines, and Melanie wasasleep. There was not even the hope of a chance caller. Visitors had fallen off to nothing this last week, for every man who could walk was in the rifle pits or chasing the Yankees about thecountryside near Jonesboro.


It was not often that she was alone like this and she did not like it. When she was alone she hadto think and, these days, thoughts were not so pleasant. Like everyone else, she had fallen into thehabit of thinking of the past, the dead.


Tonight when Atlanta was so quiet, she could close her eyes and imagine she was back in therural stillness of Tara and that life was unchanged, unchanging. But she knew that life in theCounty would never be the same again. She thought of the four Tarletons, the red-haired twins andTom and Boyd, and a passionate sadness caught at her throat. Why, either Stu or Brent might havebeen her husband. But now, when the war was over and she went back to Tara to live, she wouldnever again hear their wild halloos as they dashed up the avenue of cedars. And Raiford Calvert,who danced so divinely, would never again choose her to be his partner. And the Munroe boys andlittle Joe Fontaine andOh, Ashley! she sobbed, dropping her head into her hands. Ill never get used to you beinggone!


She heard the front gate click and she hastily raised her head and dashed her hand across her weteyes. She rose and saw it was Rhett Butler coming up the walk, carrying his wide Panama hat inhis hand. She had not seen him since the day when she had alighted from his carriage soprecipitously at Five Points. On that occasion, she had expressed the desire never to lay eyes onhim again. But she was so glad now to have someone to talk to, someone to divert her thoughtsfrom Ashley, that she hastily put the memory from her mind. Evidently he had forgotten thecontretemps, or pretended to have forgotten it, for he settled himself on the top step at her feetwithout mention of their late difference.


So you didnt refugee to Macon! I heard that Miss Pitty had retreated and, of course, I thoughtyou had gone too. So, when I saw your light I came here to investigate. Why did you stay?


To keep Melanie company. You see, shewell, she cant refugee just now.


Thunderation, he said, and in the lamplight she saw that he was frowning. You dont mean totell me Mrs. Wilkes is still here? I never heard of such idiocy. Its quite dangerous for her in hercondition.


Scarlett was silent, embarrassed, for Melanies condition was not a subject she could discusswith a man. She was embarrassed, too, that Rhett should know it was dangerous for Melanie. Suchknowledge sat ill upon a bachelor.


Its quite ungallant of you not to think that I might get hurt too, she said tartly.


His eyes flickered with amusement.


Id back you against the Yankees any day.


Im not sure that thats a compliment, she said uncertainly.


It isnt, he answered. When will you stop looking for compliments in mens lightestutterances?


When Im on my deathbed, she replied and smiled, thinking that there would always be mento compliment her, even if Rhett never did.


Vanity, vanity, he said. At least, you are frank about it.


He opened his cigar case, extracted a black cigar and held it to his nose for a moment. A matchflared, he leaned back against a post and, clasping his hands about his knees, smoked a while insilence. Scarlett resumed her rocking and the still darkness of the warm night closed about them.


The mockingbird, which nested in the tangle of roses and honeysuckle, roused from slumber andgave one timid, liquid note. Then, as if thinking better of the matter, it was silent again.


From the shadow of the porch, Rhett suddenly laughed, a low, soft laugh.


So you stayed with Mrs. Wilkes! This is the strangest situation I ever encountered!


I see nothing strange about it, she answered uncomfortably, immediately on the alert.


No? But then you lack the impersonal viewpoint My impression has been for some time pastthat you could hardly endure Mrs. Wilkes. You think her silly and stupid and her patriotic notionsbore you. You seldom pass by the opportunity to slip in some belittling remark about her, sonaturally it seems strange to me that you should elect to do the unselfish thing and stay here withher during this shelling. Now, just why did you do it?


Because shes Charlies sisterand like a sister to me, answered Scarlett with as much dignityas possible though her cheeks were growing hot.


You mean because shes Ashleys Wilkes widow.


Scarlett rose quickly, struggling with her anger.


I was almost on the point of forgiving you for your former boorish conduct but now I shant doit. I wouldnt have ever let you come upon this porch at all, if I hadnt been feeling so blue and


Sit down and smooth your ruffled fur, he said, and his voice changed. He reached up andtaking her hand pulled her back into her chair. Why are you blue?


Oh, I had a letter from Tara today. The Yankees are close to home and my little sister is ill withtyphoid andandso now, even if I could go home, like I want to, Mother wouldnt let me forfear Id catch it too. Oh, dear, and I do so want to go home!


Well, dont cry about it, he said, but his voice was kinder. You are much safer here in Atlantaeven if the Yankees do come than youd be at Tara. The Yankees wont hurt you and typhoidwould.


The Yankees wouldnt hurt me! How can you say such a lie?


My dear girl, the Yankees arent fiends. They havent horns and hoofs, as you seem to think.


They are pretty much like Southernersexcept with worse manners, of course, and terribleaccents.


Why, the Yankees would


Rape you? I think not. Though, of course, theyd want to.


If you are going to talk vilely I shall go into the house, she cried, grateful that the shadows hid her crimson face.


Be frank. Wasnt that what you were thinking?


Oh, certainly not!


Oh, but it was! No use getting mad at me for reading your thoughts. Thats what all ourdelicately nurtured and pure-minded Southern ladies think. They have it on their minds constantly.


Ill wager even dowagers like Mrs. Merriwether ...


Scarlett gulped in silence, remembering that wherever two or more matrons were gatheredtogether, in these trying days, they whispered of such happenings, always in Virginia or Tennesseeor Louisiana, never close to home. The Yankees raped women and ran bayonets through childrensstomachs and burned houses over the heads of old people. Everyone knew these things were trueeven if they didnt shout them on the street corners. And if Rhett had any decency he would realizethey were true. And not talk about them. And it wasnt any laughing matter either.


She could hear him chuckling softly. Sometimes he was odious. In fact, most of the time he wasodious. It was awful for a man to know what women really thought about and talked about. Itmade a girl feel positively undressed. And no man ever learned such things from good womeneither. She was indignant that he had read her mind. She liked to believe herself a thing of mysteryto men, but she knew Rhett thought her as transparent as glass.


Speaking of such matters, he continued, have you a protector or chaperon in the house? Theadmirable Mrs. Merriwether or Mrs. Meade? They always look at me as if they knew I was herefor no good purpose.


Mrs. Meade usually comes over at night, answered Scarlett, glad to change the subject Butshe couldnt tonight Phil, her boy, is home.


What luck, he said softly, to find you alone.


Something in his voice made her heart beat pleasantly faster and she felt her face flush. She hadheard that note in mens voices often enough to know that it presaged a declaration of love. Oh,what fun! If he would just say he loved her, how she would torment him and get even with him forall the sarcastic remarks he had flung at her these past three years. She would lead him a chase thatwould make up for even that awful humiliation of the day he witnessed her slapping Ashley. Andthen shed tell him sweetly she could only be a sister to him and retire with the full honors of war.


She laughed nervously in pleasant anticipation.


Dont giggle, he said, and taking her hand, he turned it over and pressed his lips into the palm.


Something vital, electric, leaped from him to her at the touch of his warm mouth, something thatcaressed her whole body thrillingly. His lips traveled to her wrist and she knew he must feel theleap of her pulse as her heart quickened and she tried to draw back her hand. She had not bargainedon thisthis treacherous warm tide of feeling that made her want to run her hands through hishair, to feel his lips upon her mouth.


She wasnt in love with him, she told herself confusedly. She was in love with Ashley. But howto explain this feeling that made her hands shake and the pit of her stomach grow cold?


He laughed softly.


Dont pull away! I wont hurt you!


Hurt me? Im not afraid of you, Rhett Butler, or of any man in shoe leather! she cried, furiousthat her voice shook as well as her hands.


An admirable sentiment, but do lower your voice. Mrs. Wilkes might hear you. And praycompose yourself. He sounded as though delighted at her flurry.


Scarlett, you do like me, dont you?


That was more like, what she was expecting.


Well, sometimes, she answered cautiously. When you arent acting like a varmint.


He laughed again and held the palm of her hand against his hard cheek.


I think you like me because I am a varmint. Youve known so few dyed-in-the-wool varmintsin your sheltered life that my very difference holds a quaint charm for you.


This was not the turn she had anticipated and she tried again without success to pull her handfree.


Thats not true! I like nice menmen you can depend on to always be gentlemanly.


You mean men you can always bully. Its merely a matter of definition. But no matter.


He kissed her palm again, and again the skin on the back of her neck crawled excitingly.


But you do like me. Could you ever love me, Scarlett?


Ah! she thought, triumphantly. Now Ive got him! And she answered with studied coolness:


Indeed, no. That isnot unless you mended your manners considerably.


And I have no intention of mending them. So you could not love me? That is as I hoped. Forwhile I like you immensely, I do not love you and it would be tragic indeed for you to suffer twicefrom unrequited love, wouldnt it, dear? May I call you dear, Mrs. Hamilton? I shall call youdear whether you like it or not, so no matter, but the proprieties must be observed.


You dont love me?


No, indeed. Did you hope that I did?


Dont be so presumptuous!


You hoped! Alas, to blight your hopes! I should love you, for you are charming and talented atmany useless accomplishments. But many ladies have charm and accomplishments and are just asuseless as you are. No, I dont love you. But I do like you tremendouslyfor the elasticity of yourconscience, for the selfishness which you seldom trouble to hide, and for the shrewd practicality inyou which, I fear, you get from some not too remote Irish-peasant ancestor.


Peasant! Why, he was insulting her! She began to splutter wordlessly.


Dont interrupt, he begged, squeezing her hand. I like you because I have those samequalities in me and like begets liking. I realize you still cherish the memory of the godlike andwooden-headed Mr. Wilkes, whos probably been in his grave these six months. But there must beroom in your heart for me too. Scarlett, do stop wriggling! I am making you a declaration. I have wanted you since the first time I laid eyes on you, in the hall of Twelve Oaks, when you werebewitching poor Charlie Hamilton. I want you more than I have ever wanted any womanandIve waited longer for you than Ive ever waited for any woman.


She was breathless with surprise at his last words. In spite of all his insults, he did love her andhe was just so contrary he didnt want to come out frankly and put it into words, for fear shedlaugh. Well, shed show him and right quickly.


Are you asking me to marry you?


He dropped her hand and laughed so loudly she shrank back in her chair.


Good Lord, no! Didnt I tell you I wasnt a marrying man?


He rose to his feet and, hand on heart, made her a burlesque bow.


Dear, he said quietly, I am complimenting your intelligence by asking you to be my mistresswithout having first seduced you.


Mistress!


Her mind shouted the word, shouted that she had been vilely insulted. But in that first startledmoment she did not feel insulted. She only felt a furious surge of indignation that he should thinkher such a fool. He must think her a fool if he offered her a proposition like that, instead of theproposal of matrimony she had been expecting. Rage, punctured vanity and disappointment threwher mind into a turmoil and, before she even thought of the high moral grounds on which sheshould upbraid him, she blurted out the first words which came to her lipsMistress! What would I get out of that except a passel of brats?


And then her jaw dropped in horror as she realized what she had said. He laughed until hechoked, peering at her in the shadows as she sat, stricken dumb, pressing her handkerchief to hermouth.


Thats why I like you! You are the only frank woman I know, the only woman who looks on thepractical side of matters without beclouding the issue with mouthings about sin and morality. Anyother woman would have swooned first and then shown me the door.


Scarlett leaped to her feet, her face red with shame. How could she have said such a thing! Howcould she, Ellens daughter, with her upbringing, have sat there and listened to such debasingwords and then made such a shameless reply? She should have screamed. She should have fainted.


She should have turned coldly away in silence and swept from the porch. Too late now!


I will show you the door, she shouted, not caring if Melanie or the Meades, down the street,did hear her. Get out! How dare you say such things to me! What have I ever done to encourageyouto make you suppose ... Get out and dont ever come back here. I mean it this time. Dontyou ever come back here with any of your piddling papers of pins and ribbons, thinking Ill forgiveyou. IllIll tell my father and hell kill you!


He picked up his hat and bowed and she saw in the light of the lamp that his teeth were showingin a smile beneath his mustache. He was not ashamed, he was amused at what she had said, and he was watching her with alert interest.


Oh, he was detestable! She swung round on her heel and marched into the house. She grabbedhold of the door to shut it with a bang, but the hook which held it open was too heavy for her. Shestruggled with it, panting.


May I help you? he asked.


Feeling that she would burst a blood vessel if she stayed another minute, she stormed up thestairs. And as she reached the upper floor, she heard him obligingly slam the door for her.


""--------"""


----""--------"