Chapter 50


RHETT NEVER DEVIATED from his smooth, imperturbable manners, even in their mostintimate moments. But Scarlett never lost the old feeling that he was watching her covertly, knewthat if she turned her head suddenly she would surprise in his eyes that speculative, waiting look,that look of almost terrible patience that she did not understand.


Sometimes, he was a very comfortable person to live with, for all his unfortunate habit of notpermitting anyone in his presence to act a lie, palm off a pretense or indulge in bombast. Helistened to her talk of the store and the mills and the saloon, the convicts and the cost of feedingthem, and gave shrewd hard-headed advice. He had untiring energy for the dancing and parties sheloved and an unending supply of coarse stories with which he regaled her on their infrequentevenings alone when the table was cleared and brandy and coffee before them. She found that hewould give her anything she desired, answer any question she asked as long as she was forthright,and refuse her anything she attempted to gain by indirection, hints and feminine angling. He had adisconcerting habit of seeing through her and laughing rudely.


Contemplating the suave indifference with which he generally treated her, Scarlett frequentlywondered, but with no real curiosity, why he had married her. Men married for love or a home andchildren or money but she knew he had married her for none of these things. He certainly did notlove her. He referred to her lovely house as an architectural horror and said he would rather live ina well-regulated hotel than a home. And he never once hinted about children as Charles and Frankhad done. Once when trying to coquet with him she asked why he married her and was infuriatedwhen he replied with an amused gleam in his eyes: I married you to keep you for a pet, my dear.


No, he hadnt married her for any of the usual reasons men marry women. He had married hersolely because he wanted her and couldnt get her any other way. He had admitted as much thenight he proposed to her. He had wanted her, just as he had wanted Belle Watling. This was not apleasant thought In fact it was a barefaced insult. But she shrugged it off as she had learned toshrug off all unpleasant facts. They had made a bargain and she was quite pleased with her side ofthe bargain. She hoped he was equally pleased but she did not care very much whether he was ornot.


But one afternoon when she was consulting Dr. Meade about a digestive upset, she learned anunpleasant fact which she could not shrug off. It was with real hate in her eyes that she stormedinto her bedroom at twilight and told Rhett that she was going to have a baby.


He was lounging in a silk dressing gown in a cloud of smoke and his eyes went sharply to herface as she spoke. But he said nothing. He watched her in silence but there was a tenseness abouthis pose, as he waited for her next words, that was lost on her. Indignation and despair had claimedher to the exclusion of all other thoughts.


You know I dont want any more children! I never wanted any at all. Every time things aregoing right with me I have to have a baby. Oh, dont sit there and laugh! You dont want it either.


Oh, Mother of God!


If he was waiting for words from her, these were not the words he wanted. His face hardenedslightly and his eyes became blank.


Well, why not give it to Miss Melly? Didnt you tell me she was so misguided as to wantanother baby?


Oh, I could kill you! I wont have it, I tell you, I wont!


No? Pray continue.


Oh, there are things to do. Im not the stupid country fool I used to be. Now, I know that awoman doesnt have to have children if she doesnt want them! There are things


He was on his feet and had her by the wrist and there was a hard, driving fear in his face.


Scarlett, you fool, tell me the truth! You havent done anything?


No, I havent, but Im going to. Do you think Im going to have my figure ruined all overagain, just when Ive gotten my waist line down and am having a good time.


Where did you get this idea? Whos been telling you things?


Mamie Bartshe


The madam of a whore house would know such tricks. That woman never puts foot in this houseagain, do you understand? After all, it is my house and Im the master of it. I do not even want youto speak to her again.


Ill do as I please. Turn me loose. Why should you care?


I dont care whether you have one child or twenty, but I do care if you die.


Die? Me?


Yes, die. I dont suppose Mamie Bart told you the chances a woman takes when she does athing like that?


No, said Scarlett reluctantly. She just said it would fix things up fine.


By God, I will kill her! cried Rhett and his face was black with rage. He looked down intoScarletts tear-stained face and some of the wrath faded but it was still hard and set. Suddenly hepicked her up in his arms and sat down in the chair, holding her close to him, tightly, as if he fearedshe would get away from him.


Listen, my baby, I wont have you take your life in your hands. Do you hear? Good God, Idont want children any more than you do, but I can support them. I dont want to hear any more foolishness out of you, and if you dare try toScarlett, I saw a girl die that way once. She wasonly awell, but she was a pretty sort at that. Its not an easy way to die. I


Why, Rhett! she cried, startled out of her misery at the emotion in his voice. She had neverseen him so moved. Wherewho


In New Orleansoh, years ago. I was young and impressionable. He bent his head suddenlyand buried his lips in her hair. Youll have your baby, Scarlett, if I have to handcuff you to mywrist for the next nine months.


She sat up in his lap and stared into his face with frank curiosity. Under her gaze it was suddenlysmooth and bland as though wiped clear by magic. His eyebrows were up and the corner of hismouth was down.


Do I mean so much to you? she questioned, dropping her eyelids.


He gave her a level look as though estimating how much coquetry was behind the question.


Reading the true meaning of her demeanor, he made casual answer.


Well, yes. You see, Ive invested a good deal of money in you, and Id hate to lose it.


Melanie came out of Scarletts room, weary from the strain but happy to tears at the birth ofScarletts daughter. Rhett stood tensely in the hall, surrounded by cigar butts which had burnedholes in the fine carpetYou can go in now, Captain Butler, she said shyly.


Rhett went swiftly past her into the room and Melanie had a brief glimpse of him bending overthe small naked baby in Mammys lap before Dr. Meade shut the door. Melanie sank into a chair,her face pinkening with embarrassment that she had unintentionally witnessed so intimate a scene.


Ah! she thought How sweet! How worried poor Captain Butler has been! And he did not takea single drink all this time! How nice of him. So many gentlemen are so intoxicated by the timetheir babies are born. I fear he needs a drink badly. Dare I suggest it? No, that would be veryforward of me.


She sank gratefully into a chair, her back, which always ached these days, feeling as though itwould break in two at the waist line. Oh, how fortunate Scarlett was to have Captain Butler justoutside her door while the baby was being born! If only she had had Ashley with her that dreadfulday Beau came she would not have suffered half so much. If only that small girl behind thoseclosed doors were hers and not Scarletts! Oh, how wicked I am, she thought guiltily. I amcoveting her baby and Scarlett has been so good to me. Forgive me, Lord. I wouldnt really wantScarletts baby butbut I would so like a baby of my own!


She pushed a small cushion behind her aching back and thought hungrily of a daughter of herown. But Dr. Meade had never changed his opinion on that subject. And though she was quitewilling to risk her life for another child, Ashley would not hear of it. A daughter. How Ashleywould love a daughter!


A daughter! Mercy! She sat up in alarm. I never told Captain Butler it was a girl! And of coursehe was expecting a boy. Oh, how dreadful!


Melanie knew that to a woman a child of either sex was equally welcome but to a man, andespecially such a self-willed man as Captain Butler, a girl would be a blow, a reflection upon hismanhood. Oh, how thankful she was that God had permitted her only child to be a boy! She knewthat, had she been the wife of the fearsome Captain Butler, she would have thankfully died inchildbirth rather than present him with a daughter as his first-born.


But Mammy, waddling grinning from the room, set her mind at easeand at the same timemade her wonder just what kind of man Captain Butler really was.


Wen Ah wuz bathin dat chile, jes now, said Mammy, Ah kinder pologized ter Mist Rhettbout it not bein a boy. But, Lawd, Miss Melly, you know whut he say? He say, Hesh yo mouf,Mammy! Who want a boy? Boys ain no fun. Deys jes a passel of trouble. Gals is whut is fun. Ahwouldn swap disyere gal fer a bakers dozen of boys. Den he try ter snatch de chile frum me,buck nekked as she wuz an Ah slap his wrist an say Bhave yoseff, Mist Rhett! Ahll jes bidemah time tell you gits a boy, an den Ahll laff out loud to hear you holler fer joy. He grin an


shake his haid an say, Mammy, you is a fool. Boys ain no use ter nobody. Ain Ah a proof ofdat? Yasm, Miss Melly, he ack lak a gempmum bout it, finished Mammy graciously. It was notlost on Melanie that Rhetts conduct had gone far toward redeeming him in Mammys eyes.


Maybe Ah done been a mite wrong bout Mist Rhett. Dis sho is a happy day ter me, Miss Melly.


Ah done diapered three ginrations of Robillard gals, an it sho is a happy day.


Oh, yes, it is a happy day, Mammy. The happiest days are the days when babies come!


To one person in the house it was not a happy day. Scolded and for the most part ignored, WadeHampton idled miserably about the dining room. Early that morning, Mammy had waked himabruptly, dressed him hurriedly and sent him with Ella to Aunt Pittys house for breakfast. The onlyexplanation he received was that his mother was sick and the noise of his playing might upset her.


Aunt Pittys house was in an uproar, for the news of Scarletts sickness had sent the old lady to bedin a state with Cookie in attendance, and breakfast was a scant meal that Peter concocted for thechildren. As the morning wore on fear began to possess Wades soul. Suppose Mother died? Otherboys mothers had died. He had seen the hearses move away from the house and heard his smallfriends sobbing. Suppose Mother should die? Wade loved his mother very much, almost as muchas he feared her, and the thought of her being carried away in a black hearse behind black horseswith plumes on their bridles made his small chest ache so that he could hardly breathe.


When noon came and Peter was busy in the kitchen, Wade slipped out the front door and hurriedhome as fast as his short legs could carry him, fear speeding him. Uncle Rhett or Aunt Melly orMammy surely would tell him the truth. But Uncle Rhett and Aunt Melly were not to be seen andMammy and Dilcey sped up and down the back stairs with towels and basins of hot water and didnot once notice him in the front hall. From upstairs he could hear occasionally the curt tones of Dr.


Meade whenever a door opened. Once he heard his mother groan and he burst into sobbinghiccoughs. He knew she was going to die. For comfort, he made overtures to the honey-colored catwhich lay on the sunny window sill in the front hall. But Tom, full of years and irritable atdisturbances, switched his tail and spat softly.


Finally, Mammy, coming down the front stairs, her apron rumpled and spotted, her head ragawry, saw him and scowled. Mammy had always been Wades mainstay and her frown made himtremble.


You is de wustes boy Ah ever seed, she said. Ain Ah done sont you ter Miss Pittys? Gwanback dar!


Is Mother going towill she die?


You is de troublesomes chile Ah ever seed! Die? Gawdlmighty, no! Lawd, boys is a tawment.


Ah doan see why de Lawd sens boys ter folks. Now, gwan way from here.


But Wade did not go. He retreated behind the portieres in the hall, only half convinced by herwords. The remark about the troublesomeness of boys stung, for he had always tried his best to begood. Aunt Melly hurried down the stairs half an hour later, pale and tired but smiling to herself.


She looked thunderstruck when she saw his woebegone face in the shadows of the drapery.


Usually Aunt Melly had all the time in the world to give him. She never said, as Mother so oftendid: Dont bother me now. Im in a hurry or Run away, Wade. I am busy.


But this morning she said: Wade, youve been very naughty. Why didnt you stay at AuntPittys?


Is Mother going to die?


Gracious, no, Wade! Dont be a silly child, and then, relenting: Dr. Meade has just broughther a nice little baby, a sweet little sister for you to play with, and if you are real good you can seeher tonight. Now, run out and play and dont make any noise.


Wade slipped into the quiet dining room, his small and insecure world tottering. Was there noplace for a worried little seven-year-old boy on this sunshiny day when the grown-ups acted socuriously? He sat down on the window still in the alcove and nibbled a bit of the elephants earwhich grew in a box in the sun. It was so peppery that it stung his eyes to tears and he began to cry.


Mother was probably dying, nobody paid him any heed and one and all, they rushed about becauseof a new babya girl baby. Wade had little interest in babies, still less in girls. The only little girlhe knew intimately was Ella and, so far, she had done nothing to command his respect or liking.


After a long interval Dr. Meade and Uncle Rhett came down the stairs and stood talking in thehall in low voices. After the door shut behind the doctor, Uncle Rhett came swiftly into the diningroom and poured himself a large drink from the decanter before he saw Wade. Wade shrank back,expecting to be told again that he was naughty and must return to Aunt Pittys, but instead, UncleRhett smiled. Wade had never seen him smile like that or look so happy and, encouraged, heleaped from the sill and ran to him.


Youve got a sister, said Rhett, squeezing him. By God, the most beautiful baby you eversaw! Now, why are you crying?


Your mothers eating a great big dinner, chicken and rice and gravy and coffee, and weregoing to make her some ice cream in a little while and you can have two plates if you want them.


And Ill show you your sister too.


Weak with relief, Wade tried to be polite about his new sister but failed. Everyone was interestedin this girl. No one cared anything about him any more, not even Aunt Melly or Uncle Rhett.


Uncle Rhett, he began, do people like girls better than boys?


Rhett set down his glass and looked sharply into the small face and instant comprehension cameinto his eyes.


No, I cant say they do, he answered seriously, as though giving the matter due thought. Itsjust that girls are more trouble than boys and people are apt to worry more about troublesomepeople than those who arent.


Mammy just said boys were troublesome.


Well, Mammy was upset. She didnt mean it.


Uncle Rhett, wouldnt you rather have had a little boy than a little girl? questioned Wadehopefully.


No, answered Rhett swiftly and, seeing the boys face fall, he continued: Now, why should Iwant a boy when Ive already got one?


You have? cried Wade, his month falling open at this information. Where is he?


Right here, answered Rhett and, picking the child up, drew him to his knee. You are boyenough for me, son.


For a moment, the security and happiness of being wanted was so great that Wade almost criedagain. His throat worked and he ducked his head against Rhetts waistcoat.


You are my boy, arent you?


Can you bewell, two mens boy? questioned Wade, loyalty to the father he had neverknown struggling with love for the man who held him so understandingly.


Yes, said Rhett firmly. Just like you can be your mothers boy and Aunt Mellys, too.


Wade digested this statement. It made sense to him and he smiled and wriggled against Rhettsarm shyly.


You understand little boys, dont you, Uncle Rhett?


Rhetts dark face fell into its old harsh lines and his lip twisted.


Yes, he said bitterly, I understand little boys.


For a moment, fear came back to Wade, fear and a sudden sense of jealousy. Uncle Rhett wasnot thinking of him but of some one else.


You havent got any other began Wade and then Rhett set him on his feet.


Im going to have a drink and so are you, Wade, your first drink, a toast to your new sister.


You havent got any other began Wade and then seeing Rhett reach for the decanter ofclaret, the excitement at being included in this grown-up ceremony diverted him.


Oh, I cant, Uncle Rhett! I promised Aunt Melly I wouldnt drink till I graduated from the university and shes going to give me a watch, if I dont.


And Ill give you a chain for itthis one Im wearing now, if you want it, said Rhett and hewas smiling again. Aunt Mellys quite right But she was talking about spirits, not wine. You mustlearn to drink, wine like a gentleman, son, and theres no time like the present to learn.


Skillfully, he diluted the claret with water from the carafe until the liquid was barely pink andhanded the glass to Wade. At that moment, Mammy entered the dining room. She had changed toher best Sunday black and her apron and head rag were fresh and crisp. As she waddled, sheswitched herself and from her skirts came the whisper and rustle of silk. The worried look hadgone from her face and her almost toothless gums showed in a wide smile.


Burfday gif, Mist Rhett! she said.


Wade stopped with his glass at his lips. He knew Mammy had never liked his stepfather. He hadnever heard her call him anything except Capn Butler, and her conduct toward him had beendignified but cold. And here she was beaming and sidling and calling him Mist Rhett! What atopsy-turvy day!


Youd rather have rum than claret, I suppose, said Rhett, reaching into the cellaret andproducing a squat bottle. She is a beautiful baby, isnt she, Mammy?


She sho is, answered Mammy, smacking her lips as she took the glass.


Did you ever see a prettier one?


Well, suh, Miss Scarlett wuz mout nigh as pretty wen she come but not quite.


Have another glass, Mammy. And Mammy, his tone was stern but his eyes twinkled, whatsthat rustling noise I hear?


Lawd, Mist Rhett, dat ain nuthin but mah red silk petticoat! Mammy giggled and switchedtill her huge bulk shook.


Nothing but your petticoat! I dont believe it. You sound like a peck of dried leaves rubbingtogether. Let me see. Pull up your skirt.


Mist Rhett, you is bad! Yeah-O, Lawd!


Mammy gave a little shriek and retreated and from a distance of a yard, modestly elevated herdress a few inches and showed the ruffle of a red taffeta petticoat.


You took long enough about wearing it, grumbled Rhett but his black eyes laughed anddanced.


Yassuh, too long.


Then Rhett said something that Wade did not understand.


No more mule in horse harness?


Mist Rhett, Miss Scarlett wuz bad ter tell you dat! You ain holin dat again dis ole nigger?


No. Im not holding it. I just wanted to know. Have another drink, Mammy. Have the wholebottle. Drink up, Wade! Give us a toast.


To Sissy, cried Wade and gulped the liquid down. Choking he began to cough and hiccoughand the other two laughed and beat him on the back.


From the moment his daughter was born, Rhetts conduct was puzzling to all observers and heupset many settled notions about himself, notions which both the town and Scarlett were loath tosurrender. Whoever would have thought that he of all people would be so shamelessly, so openlyproud of fatherhood? Especially in view of the embarrassing circumstance that his first-born was agirl and not a boy.


The novelty of fatherhood did not wear off. This caused some secret envy among women whosehusbands took offspring for granted, long before the children were christened. He buttonholedpeople on the street and related details of his childs miraculous progress without even prefacinghis remarks with the hypocritical but polite: I know everyone thinks their own child is smart but He thought his daughter marvelous, not to be compared with lesser brats, and he did not carewho knew it. When the new nurse permitted the baby to suck a bit of fat pork, thereby bringing onthe first attack of colic, Rhetts conduct sent seasoned fathers and mothers into gales of laughter.


He hurriedly summoned Dr. Meade and two other doctors, and with difficulty he was restrainedfrom beating the unfortunate with his crop. The was discharged and thereafter followedaseriesofnurseswhorema(nurse) ined,atthemost,aweek.N(nurse) one of them was good enough tosatisfy the exacting requirements Rhett laid down.


Mammy likewise viewed with displeasure the nurses that came and went, for she was jealous ofany strange negro and saw no reason why she could not care for the baby and Wade and Ella, too.


But Mammy was showing her age and rheumatism was slowing her lumbering tread. Rhett lackedthe courage to cite these reasons for employing another nurse. He told her instead that a man of hisposition could not afford to have only one nurse. It did not look well. He would hire two others todo the drudgery and leave her as Mammy-in-chief. This Mammy understood very well. Moreservants were a credit to her position as well as Rhetts. But she would not, she told him firmly,have any trashy free issue niggers in her nursery. So Rhett sent to Tara for Prissy. He knew hershortcomings but, after all, she was a family darky. And Uncle Peter produced a great-niece namedLou who had belonged to one of Miss Pittys Burr cousins.


Even before Scarlett was able to be about again, she noticed Rhetts pre-occupation with thebaby and was somewhat nettled and embarrassed at his pride in her in front of callers. It was allvery well for a man to love his child but she felt there was something unmanly in the display ofsuch love. He should be offhand and careless, as other men were.


You are making a fool of yourself, she said irritably, and I dont see why.


No? Well, you wouldnt. The reason is that shes the first person whos ever belonged utterly tome.


She belongs to me, too!


No, you have two other children. Shes mine.


Great balls of fire! said Scarlett. I had the baby, didnt I? Besides, honey, I belong to you.


Rhett looked at her over the black head of the child and smiled oddly.


Do you, my dear?


Only the entrance of Melanie stopped one of those swift hot quarrels which seemed to spring upso easily between them these days. Scarlett swallowed her wrath and watched Melanie take thebaby. The name agreed upon for the child was Eugenic Victoria, but that afternoon Melanieunwittingly bestowed a name that clung, even as Pittypat had blotted out all memory of SarahJane.


Rhett leaning over the child had said: Her eyes are going to be pea green.


Indeed they are not, cried Melanie indignantly, forgetting that Scarletts eyes were almost thatshade. They are going to be blue, like Mr. OHaras eyes, as blue asas blue as the bonnie blueflag.


Bonnie Blue Butler, laughed Rhett, taking the child from her and peering more closely intothe small eyes. And Bonnie she became until even her parents did not recall that she had beennamed for two queens.


"""--------"""""""""


------------"""----"----"


""""""----