Chapter 51


WHEN SHE WAS FINALLY able to go out again, Scarlett had Lou lace her into stays as tightlyas the strings would pull. Then she passed the tape measure about her waist. Twenty inches! Shegroaned aloud. That was what having babies did to your figure! Her waist was a large as AuntPittys, as large as Mammys.


Pull them tighter, Lou. See if you cant make it eighteen and a half inches or I cant get into anyof my dresses.


Itll bust de strings, said Lou. Yo wais jes done got bigger, Miss Scarlett, an dar ain


nuthin ter do bout it.


There is something to do about it, thought Scarlett as she ripped savagely at the seams of herdress to let out the necessary inches. I just wont have any more babies.


Of course, Bonnie was pretty and a credit to her and Rhett adored the child, but she would nothave another baby. Just how she would manage this she did not know, for she couldnt handleRhett as she had Frank. Rhett wasnt afraid of her. It would probably be difficult with Rhett actingso foolishly about Bonnie and probably wanting a son next year, for all that he said hed drownany boy she gave him. Well, she wouldnt give him a boy or girl either. Three children wereenough for any woman to have.


When Lou had stitched up the ripped seams, pressed them smooth and buttoned Scarlett into thedress, she called the carriage and Scarlett set out for the lumber yard. Her spirits rose as she wentand she forgot about her waist line, for she was going to meet Ashley at the yard to go over thebooks with him. And, if she was lucky, she might see him alone. She hadnt seen him since longbefore Bonnie was born. She hadnt wanted to see him at all when she was so obviously pregnant.


And she had missed the daily contact with him, even if there was always someone around. She had missed the importance and activity of her lumber business while she was immured. Of course, shedid not have to work now. She could easily sell the mills and invest the money for Wade and Ella.


But that would mean she would hardly ever see Ashley, except in a formal social way with crowdsof people around. And working by Ashleys side was her greatest pleasure.


When she drove up to the yard she saw with interest how high the piles of lumber were and howmany customers were standing among them, talking to Hugh Elsing. And there were six muleteams and wagons being loaded by the negro drivers. Six teams, she thought, with pride. And I didall this by myself!


Ashley came to the door of the little office, his eyes joyful with the pleasure of seeing her againand he handed her out of her carriage and into the office as if she were a queen.


But some of her pleasure was dimmed when she went over the books of his null and comparedthem with Johnnie Galleghers books. Ashley had barely made expenses and Johnnie had aremarkable sum to his credit. She forbore to say anything as she looked at the two sheets butAshley read her face.


Scarlett, Im sorry. All I can say is that I wish youd let me hire free darkies instead of usingconvicts. I believe I could do better.


Darkies! Why, their pay would break us. Convicts are dirt cheap. If Johnnie can make thismuch with them


Ashleys eyes went over her shoulder, looking at something she could not see, and the glad lightwent out of his eyes.


I cant work convicts like Johnnie Gallegher. I cant drive men.


Gods nightgown! Johnnies a wonder at it. Ashley, you are just too soft hearted. You ought toget more work out of them. Johnnie told me that any time a malingerer wanted to get out of workhe told you he was sick and you gave him a day off. Good Lord, Ashley! Thats no way to makemoney. A couple of licks will cure most any sickness short of a broken leg


Scarlett! Scarlett! Stop! I cant bear to hear you talk that way, cried Ashley, his eyes comingback to her with a fierceness that stopped her short. Dont you realize that they are mensome ofthem sick, underfed, miserable and Oh, my dear, I cant bear to see the way he has brutalizedyou, you who were always so sweet


Who has whatted me?


Ive got to say it and I havent any right. But Ive got to say it YourRhett Butler. Everythinghe touches he poisons. And he has taken you who were so sweet and generous and gentle, for allyour spirited ways, and he has done this to youhardened you, brutalized you by his contact.


Oh, breathed Scarlett, guilt struggling with joy that Ashley should feel so deeply about her,should still think her sweet. Thank God, he thought Rhett to blame for her penny-pinching ways.


Of course, Rhett had nothing to do with it and the guilt was hers but, after all, another black markon Rhett could do him no harm.


If it were any other man in the world, I wouldnt care so muchbut Rhett Butler! Ive seenwhat hes done to you. Without your realizing it, hes twisted your thoughts into the same hard path his own run in. Oh, yes, I know I shouldnt say this He saved my life and I am grateful but Iwish to God it had been any other man but him! And I havent the right to talk to you like


Oh, Ashley, you have the rightno one else has!


I tell you I cant bear it, seeing your fineness coarsened by him, knowing that your beauty andyour charm are in the keeping of a man who When I think of him touching you, I


Hes going to kiss me! thought Scarlett ecstatically. And it wont be my fault! She swayedtoward him. But he drew back suddenly, as if realizing he had said too muchsaid things he neverintended to say.


I apologize most humbly, Scarlett IIve been insinuating that your husband is not agentleman and my own words have proved that Im not one. No one has a right to criticize ahusband to a wife. I havent any excuse exceptexcept He faltered and his face twisted. Shewaited breathless.


I havent any excuse at all.


All the way home in the carriage Scarletts mind raced. No excuse at all exceptexcept that heloved her! And the thought of her lying in Rhetts arms roused a fury in him that she did not thinkpossible. Well, she could understand that. If it wasnt for the knowledge that his relations withMelanie were, necessarily, those of brother and sister, her own life would be a torment And Rhettsembraces coarsened her, brutalized her! Well, if Ashley thought that, she could do very wellwithout those embraces. She thought how sweet and romantic it would be for them both to bephysically true to each other, even though married to other people. The idea possessed herimagination and she took pleasure in it. And then, too, there was the practical side of it. It wouldmean that she would not have to have any more children.


When she reached home and dismissed the carriage, some of the exaltation which had filled herat Ashleys words began to fade as she faced the prospect of telling Rhett that she wanted separatebedrooms and all which that implied. It would be difficult. Moreover, how could she tell Ashleythat she had denied herself to Rhett, because of his wishes? What earthly good was a sacrifice if noone knew about it? What a burden modesty and delicacy were! If she could only talk to Ashley asfrankly as she could to Rhett! Well, no matter. Shed insinuate the truth to Ashley somehow.


She went up the stairs and, opening the nursery door, found Rhett sitting beside Bonnies cribwith Ella upon his lap and Wade displaying the contents of his pocket to him. What a blessingRhett liked children and made much of them! Some stepfathers were so bitter about children offormer marriages.


I want to talk to you, she said and passed on into their bedroom. Better have this over nowwhile her determination not to have any more children was hot within her and while Ashleys lovewas giving her strength.


Rhett, she said abruptly when he had closed the bedroom door behind him, Ive decided thatI dont want any more children.


If he was startled at her unexpected statement he did not show it. He lounged to a chair andsitting down, tilted it back.


My pet, as I told you before Bonnie was born, it is immaterial to me whether you have onechild or twenty.


How perverse of him to evade the issue so neatly, as if not caring whether children came hadanything to do with their actual arrival.


I think three are enough. I dont intend to have one every year.


Three seems an adequate number.


You know very well she began, embarrassment making her cheeks red. You know what Imean?


I do. Do you realize that I can divorce you for refusing me my marital rights?


You are just low enough to think of something like that, she cried, annoyed that nothing wasgoing as she planned it. If you had any chivalry youdyoud be nice like Well, look at AshleyWilkes. Melanie cant have any children and he


Quite the little gentleman, Ashley, said Rhett and his eyes began to gleam oddly. Pray go onwith your discourse.


Scarlett choked, for her discourse was at its end and she had nothing more to say. Now she sawhow foolish had been her hope of amicably settling so important a matter, especially with a selfishswine like Rhett.


Youve been to the lumber office this afternoon, havent you?


What has that to do with it?


You like dogs, dont you, Scarlett? Do you prefer them in kennels or mangers?


The allusion was lost on her as the tide of her anger and disappointment rose.


He got lightly to his feet and coming to her put his hand under her chin and jerked her face up tohis.


What a child you are! You have lived with three men and still know nothing of mens natures.


You seem to think they are like old ladies past the change of life.


He pinched her chin playfully and his hand dropped away from her. One black eyebrow went upas he bent a cool long look on her.


Scarlett, understand this. If you and your bed still held any charms for me, no looks and noentreaties could keep me away. And I would have no sense of shame for anything I did, for I madea bargain with youa bargain which I have kept and you are now breaking. Keep your chaste bed,my dear.


Do you mean to tell me, cried Scarlett indignantly, that you dont care


You have tired of me, havent you? Well, men tire more easily than women. Keep your sanctity,Scarlett. It will work no hardship on me. It doesnt matter, he shrugged and grinned. Fortunatelythe world is full of bedsand most of the beds are full of women.


You mean youd actually be so


My dear innocent! But, of course. Its a wonder I havent strayed long ere this. I never heldfidelity to be a virtue.


I shall lock my door every night!


Why bother? If I wanted you, no lock would keep me out.


He turned, as though the subject were closed, and left the room. Scarlett heard him going backto the nursery where he was welcomed by the children. She sat down abruptly. She had had herway. This was what she wanted and Ashley wanted. But it was not making her happy. Her vanitywas sore and she was mortified at the thought that Rhett had taken it all so lightly, that he didntwant her, that he put her on the level of other women in other beds.


She wished she could think of some delicate way to tell Ashley that she and Rhett were nolonger actually man and wife. But she knew now she could not. It all seemed a terrible mess nowand she half heartedly wished she had said nothing about it. She would miss the long amusingconversations in bed with Rhett when the ember of his cigar glowed in the dark. She would missthe comfort of his arms when she woke terrified from the dreams that she was running throughcold mist.


Suddenly she felt very unhappy and leaning her head on the arm of the chair, she cried.


"----"""------------""----""


------------""----"--------"""----


------------"


""------------""""


----""----"


""----"----""""