Chapter 10


OVER THE WAFFLES next morning, Pittypat was lachrymose, Melanie was silent and Scarlettdefiant.


I dont care if they do talk. Ill bet I made more money for the hospital than any girl theremore than all the messy old stuff we sold, too.


Oh, dear, what does the money matter? wailed Pittypat, wringing her hands. I just couldntbelieve my eyes, and poor Charlie hardly dead a year. ... And that awful Captain Butler, makingyou so conspicuous, and hes a terrible, terrible person, Scarlett. Mrs. Whitings cousin, Mrs.


Coleman, whose husband came from Charleston, told me about him. Hes the black sheep of alovely familyoh, how could any of the Butlers ever turn out anything like him? He isnt receivedin Charleston and he has the fastest reputation and there was something about a girlsomething sobad Mrs. Coleman didnt even know what it was


Oh, I cant believe hes that bad, said Melly gently. He seemed a perfect gentleman and whenyou think how brave hes been, running the blockade


He isnt brave, said Scarlett perversely, pouring half a pitcher of syrup over her waffles. Hejust does it for money. He told me so. He doesnt care anything about the Confederacy and he sayswere going to get licked. But he dances divinely.


Her audience was speechless with horror.


Im tired of sitting at home and Im not going to do it any longer. If they all talked about meabout last night, then my reputation is already gone and it wont matter what else they say.


It did not occur to her that the idea was Rhett Butlers. It came so patly and fitted so well withwhat she was thinking.


Oh! What will your mother say when she hears? What will she think of me?


A cold qualm of guilt assailed Scarlett at the thought of Ellens consternation, should she everlearn of her daughters scandalous conduct. But she took heart at the thought of the twenty-fivemiles between Atlanta and Tara. Miss Pitty certainly wouldnt tell Ellen. It would put her in such abad light as a chaperon. And if Pitty didnt tattle, she was safe.


I think said Pitty, yes, I think Id better write Henry a letter about itmuch as I hate itbut hes our only male relative, and make him go speak reprovingly to Captain Butler Oh, dear,if Charlie were only alive You must never, never speak to that man again, Scarlett.


Melanie had been sitting quietly, her hands in her lap, her waffles cooling on her plate. She aroseand, coming behind Scarlett, put her arms about her neck.


Darling, she said, dont you get upset. I understand and it was a brave thing you did last nightand its going to help the hospital a lot. And if anybody dares say one little word about you, Illtend to them. ... Aunt Pitty, dont cry. It has been hard on Scarlett, not going anywhere. Shes just ababy. Her fingers played in Scarletts black hair. And maybe wed all be better off if we went outoccasionally to parties. Maybe weve been very selfish, staying here with our grief. War timesarent like other times. When I think of all the soldiers in town who are far from home and havent any friends to call on at nightand the ones in the hospital who are well enough to be out of bedand not well enough to go back in the army Why, we have been selfish.


We ought to have threeconvalescents in our house this minute, like everybody else, and some of the soldiers out to dinnerevery Sunday. There, Scarlett, dont you fret. People wont talk when they understand. We knowyou loved Charlie.


Scarlett was far from fretting and Melanies soft hands in her hair were irritating. She wanted tojerk her head away and say Oh, fiddle-dee-dee! for the warming memory was still on her of howthe Home Guard and the militia and the soldiers from the hospital had fought for her dances lastnight. Of all the people in the world, she didnt want Melly for a defender. She could defendherself, thank you, and if the old cats wanted to squallwell, she could get along without the oldcats. There were too many nice officers in the world for her to bother about what old women said.


Pittypat was dabbing at her eyes under Melanies soothing words when Prissy entered with abulky letter.


Fer you, Miss Melly. A lil nigger boy brung it.


For me? said Melly, wondering, as she ripped open the envelope.


Scarlett was making headway with her waffles and so noticed nothing until she heard a burst oftears from Melly and, looking up, saw Aunt Pittypats hand go to her heart.


Ashleys dead! screamed Pittypat, throwing her head back and letting her arms go limp.


Oh, my God! cried Scarlett, her blood turning to ice water.


No! No! cried Melanie. Quick! Her smelling salts, Scarlett! There, there, honey, do you feelbetter? Breathe deep. No, its not Ashley. Im so sorry I scared you. I was crying because Im sohappy, and suddenly she opened her clenched palm and pressed some object that was in it to herlips. Im so happy, and burst into tears again.


Scarlett caught a fleeting glimpse and saw that it was a broad gold ring.


Read it, said Melly, pointing to the letter on the floor. Oh, how sweet, how kind, he is!


Scarlett, bewildered, picked up the single sheet and saw written in a black, bold hand: TheConfederacy may need the lifeblood of its men but not yet does it demand the hearts blood of itswomen. Accept, dear Madam, this token of my reverence for your courage and do not think thatyour sacrifice has been in vain, for this ring has been redeemed at ten times its value. CaptainRhett Butler.


Melanie slipped the ring on her finger and looked at it lovingly.


I told you he was a gentleman, didnt I? she said turning to Pittypat her smile bright throughthe teardrops on her face. No one but a gentleman of refinement and thoughtfulness would everhave thought how it broke my heart to Ill send my gold chain instead. Aunt Pittypat, you mustwrite him a note and invite him to Sunday dinner so I can thank him.


In the excitement, neither of the others seemed to have thought that Captain Butler had notreturned Scarletts ring, too. But she thought of it, annoyed. And she knew it had not been CaptainButlers refinement that had prompted so gallant a gesture. It was that he intended to be asked into Pittypats house and knew unerringly how to get the invitation.


I was greatly disturbed to hear of your recent conduct, ran Ellens letter and Scarlett, who wasreading it at the table, scowled. Bad news certainly traveled swiftly. She had often heard inCharleston and Savannah that Atlanta people gossiped more and meddled in other peoplesbusiness more than any other people in the South, and now she believed it. The bazaar had takenplace Monday night and today was only Thursday. Which of the old cats had taken it upon herselfto write Ellen? For a moment she suspected Pittypat but immediately abandoned that thought. PoorPittypat had been quaking in her number-three shoes for fear of being blamed for Scarlettsforward conduct and would be the last to notify Ellen of her own inadequate chaperonage.


Probably it was Mrs. Merriwether.


It is difficult for me to believe that you could so forget yourself and your rearing. I will passover the impropriety of your appearing publicly while in mourning, realizing your warm desire tobe of assistance to the hospital. But to dance, and with such a man as Captain Butler! I have heardmuch of him (as who has not?) and Pauline wrote me only last week that he is a man of bad reputeand not even received by his own family in Charleston, except of course by his heartbrokenmother. He is a thoroughly bad character who would take advantage of your youth and innocenceto make you conspicuous and publicly disgrace you and your family. How could Miss Pittypathave so neglected her duty to you?


Scarlett looked across the table at her aunt The old lady had recognized Ellens handwriting andher fat little mouth was pursed in a frightened way, like a baby who fears a scolding and hopes toward it off by tears.


I am heartbroken to think that you could so soon forget your rearing. I have thought of callingyou home immediately but will leave that to your fathers discretion. He will be in Atlanta Fridayto speak with Captain Butler and to escort you home. I fear he will be severe with you despite mypleadings. I hope and pray it was only youth and thoughtlessness that prompted such forwardconduct. No one can wish to serve our Cause more than I, and I wish my daughters to feel thesame way, but to disgrace


There was more in the same vein but Scarlett did not finish it. For once, she was thoroughlyfrightened. She did not feel reckless and defiant now. She felt as young and guilty as when she wasten and had thrown a buttered biscuit at Suellen at the table. To think of her gentle motherreproving her so harshly and her father coming to town to talk to Captain Butler. The realseriousness of the matter grew on her. Gerald was going to be severe. This was one time when sheknew she couldnt wiggle out of her punishment by sitting on his knee and being sweet and pert.


Notnot bad news? quavered PittypatPa is coming tomorrow and hes going to land on me like a duck on a June bug, answeredScarlett dolorously.


Prissy, find my salts, fluttered Pittypat, pushing back her chair from her half-eaten meal. IIfeel faint.


Deys in yo skirt pocket, said Prissy, who had been hovering behind Scarlett, enjoying the sensational drama. Mist Gerald in a temper was always exciting, providing his temper was notdirected at her kinky head. Pitty fumbled at her skirt and held the vial to her nose.


You all must stand by me and not leave me alone with him for one minute, cried ScarlettHes so fond of you both, and if you are with me he cant fuss at me.


I couldnt said Pittypat weakly, rising to her feet II feel ill. I must go lie down. I shall liedown all day tomorrow. You must give him my excuses.


Coward! thought Scarlett glowering at her.


Melly rallied to the defense, though white and frightened at the prospect of facing the fire-eatingMr. OHara. IllIll help you explain how you did it for the hospital. Surely hell understand.


No, he wont, said Scarlett. And oh, I shall die if I have to go back to Tara in disgrace, likeMother threatens!


Oh, you cant go home, cried Pittypat bursting into tears. If you did I should be forcedyes,forced to ask Henry to come live with us, and you know I just couldnt live with Henry. Im sonervous with just Melly in the house at night, with so many strange men in town. Youre so brave Idont mind being here without a man!


Oh, he couldnt take you to Tara! said Melly, looking as if she too would cry in a moment.


This is your home now. What would we ever do without you?


Youd be glad to do without me if you knew what I really think of you, thought Scarlettsourly, wishing there were some other person than Melanie to help ward off Geralds wrath. It wassickening to be defended by someone you disliked so much.


Perhaps we should recall our invitation to Captain Butler began PittypatOh, we couldnt! It would be the height of rudeness! cried Melly, distressed.


Help me to bed. Im going to be ill, moaned Pittypat. Oh, Scarlett, how could you havebrought this on me?


Pittypat was ill and in her bed when Gerald arrived the next afternoon. She sent many messagesof regret to him from behind her closed door and left the two frightened girls to preside over thesupper table. Gerald was ominously silent although he kissed Scarlett and pinched Melanies cheekapprovingly and called her Cousin Melly. Scarlett would have infinitely preferred bellowingoaths and accusations. True to her promise, Melanie clung to Scarletts skirts like a small rustlingshadow and Gerald was too much of a gentleman to upbraid his daughter in front of her. Scarletthad to admit that Melanie carried off things very well, acting as if she knew nothing was amiss,and she actually succeeded in engaging Gerald in conversation, once the supper had been served.


I want to know all about the County, she said, beaming upon him. India and Honey are suchpoor correspondents, and I know you know everything that goes on down there. Do tell us aboutJoe Fontaines wedding.


Gerald warmed to the flattery and said that the wedding had been a quiet affair, not like yougirls had, for Joe had only a few days furlough. Sally, the little Munroe chit, looked very pretty.


No, he couldnt recall what she wore but he did hear that she didnt have a second-day dress.


She didnt! exclaimed the girls, scandalized.


Sure, because she didnt have a second day, Gerald explained and bawled with laughter beforerecalling that perhaps such remarks were not fit for female ears. Scarletts spirits soared at hislaugh and she blessed Melanies tact.


Back Joe went to Virginia the next day, Gerald added hastily. There was no visiting aboutand dancing afterwards. The Tarleton twins are home.


We heard that. Have they recovered?


They werent badly wounded. Stuart had it in the knee and a minie ball went through Brentsshoulder. You had it, too, that they were mentioned in dispatches for bravery?


No! Tell us!


Hare brainedboth of them. Im believing theres Irish in them, said Gerald complacently. Iforget what they did, but Brent is a lieutenant now.


Scarlett felt pleased at hearing of their exploits, pleased in a proprietary manner. Once a manhad been her beau, she never lost the conviction that he belonged to her, and all his good deedsredounded to her credit.


And Ive news thatll be holding the both of you, said Gerald. Theyre saying Stu is courtingat Twelve Oaks again.


Honey or India? questioned Melly excitedly, while Scarlett stared almost indignantly.


Oh, Miss India, to be sure. Didnt she have him fast till this baggage of mine winked at him?


Oh, said Melly, somewhat embarrassed at Geralds outspokenness.


And more than that, young Brent has taken to hanging about Tara. Now!


Scarlett could not speak. The defection of her beaux was almost insulting. Especially when sherecalled how wildly both the twins had acted when she told them she was going to marry Charles.


Stuart had even threatened to shoot Charles, or Scarlett, or himself, or all three. It had been mostexciting.


Suellen? questioned Melly, breaking into a pleased smile. But I thought Mr. Kennedy


Oh, him? said Gerald. Frank Kennedy still pussyfoots about, afraid of his shadow, and Ill beasking him his intentions soon if he doesnt speak up. No, tis me baby.


Shes nothing but a child! said Scarlett sharply, finding her tongue.


Shes little more than a year younger than you were, Miss, when you were married, retortedGerald. Is it youre grudging your old beau to your sister?


Melly blushed, unaccustomed to such frankness, and signaled Peter to bring in the sweet potatopie. Frantically she cast about in her mind for some other topic of conversation which would not beso personal but which would divert Mr. OHara from the purpose of his trip. She could think ofnothing but, once started, Gerald needed no stimulus other than an audience. He talked on about the thievery of the commissary department which every month increased its demands, the knavishstupidity of Jefferson Davis and the blackguardery of the Irish who were being enticed into theYankee army by bounty money.


When the wine was on the table and the two girls rose to leave him, Gerald cocked a severe eyeat his daughter from under frowning brows and commanded her presence alone for a few minutes.


Scarlett cast a despairing glance at Melly, who twisted her handkerchief helplessly and went out,softly pulling the sliding doors together.


How now, Missy! bawled Gerald, pouring himself a glass of port.  Tis a fine way to act! Is itanother husband youre trying to catch and you so fresh a widow?


Not so loud, Pa, the servants


They know already, to be sure, and everybody knows of our disgrace. And your poor mothertaking to her bed with it and me not able to hold up me head. Tis shameful. No, Puss, you neednot think to get around me with tears this time, he said hastily and with some panic in his voice asScarletts lids began to bat and her mouth to screw up. I know you. Youd be flirting at the wakeof your husband. Dont cry. There, Ill be saying no more tonight, for Im going to see this fineCaptain Butler who makes so light of me daughters reputation. But in the morning There now,dont cry. Twill do you no good at all, at all. Tis firm that I am and back to Tara youll be goingtomorrow before youre disgracing the lot of us again. Dont cry, pet. Look what Ive brought you!


Isnt that a pretty present? See, look! How could you be putting so much trouble on me, bringingme all the way up here when tis a busy man I am? Dont cry!


Melanie and Pittypat had gone to sleep hours before, but Scarlett lay awake in the warmdarkness, her heart heavy and frightened in her breast. To leave Atlanta when life had just begunagain and go home and face Ellen! She would rather die than face her mother. She wished she weredead, this very minute, then everyone would be sorry they had been so hateful. She turned andtossed on the hot pillow until a noise far up the quiet street reached her ears. It was an oddlyfamiliar noise, blurred and indistinct though it was. She slipped out of bed and went to the window.


The street with its over-arching trees was softly, deeply black under a dim star-studded sky. Thenoise came closer, the sound of wheels, the plod of a horses hooves and voices. And suddenly shegrinned for, as a voice thick with brogue and whisky came to her, raised in Peg in a Low-backedCar, she knew. This might not be Jonesboro on Court Day, but Gerald was coming home in thesame condition.


She saw the dark bulk of a buggy stop in front of the house and indistinct figures alight.


Someone was with him. Two figures paused at the gate and she heard the click of the latch andGeralds voice came plain.


Now Ill be giving you the Lament for Robert Emmet. Tis a song you should be knowing, melad. Ill teach It to you.


Id like to learn it, replied his companion, a hint of buried laughter in his flat drawling voice.


But not now, Mr. OHara.


Oh, my God, its that hateful Butler man! thought Scarlett, at first annoyed. Then she took heart. At least they hadnt shot each other. And they must be on amicable terms to be coming hometogether at this hour and in this condition.


Sing it I will and listen you will or Ill be shooting you for the Orangeman you are.


Not OrangemanCharlestonian.


Tis no better. Tis worse. I have two sister-in-laws in Charleston and I know.


Is he going to tell the whole neighborhood? thought Scarlett panic-stricken, reaching for herwrapper. But what could she do? She couldnt go downstairs at this hour of the night and drag herfather in from the street.


With no further warning, Gerald, who was hanging on the gate, threw back his head and beganthe Lament, in a roaring bass. Scarlett rested her elbows on the window sill and listened,grinning unwillingly. It would be a beautiful song, if only her father could carry a tune. It was oneof her favorite songs and, for a moment, she followed the fine melancholy of those versesbeginning:


She is far from the land where her young hero sleepsAnd lovers are round her sighing.


The song went on and she heard stirrings in Pittypats and Mellys rooms. Poor things, theydcertainly be upset. They were not used to full-blooded males like Gerald. When the song hadfinished, two forms merged into one, came up the walk and mounted the steps. A discreet knocksounded at the door.


I suppose I must go down, thought Scarlett. After all hes my father and poor Pitty would diebefore shed go. Besides, she didnt want the servants to see Gerald in his present condition. Andif Peter tried to put him to bed, he might get unruly. Pork was the only one who knew how tohandle him.


She pinned the wrapper close about her throat, lit her bedside candle and hurried down the darkstairs into the front hall. Setting the candle on the stand, she unlocked the door and in the waveringlight she saw Rhett Butler, not a ruffle disarranged, supporting her small, thickset father. TheLament had evidently been Geralds swan song for he was frankly hanging onto his companionsarm. His hat was gone, his crisp long hair was tumbled in a white mane, his cravat was under oneear, and there were liquor stains down his shirt bosom.


Your father, I believe? said Captain Butler, his eyes amused in his swarthy face. He took inher dishabille in one glance that seemed to penetrate through her wrapper.


Bring him in, she said shortly, embarrassed at her attire, infuriated at Gerald for putting her ina position where this man could laugh at her.


Rhett propelled Gerald forward. Shall I help you take him upstairs? You cannot manage him.


Hes quite heavy.


Her mouth fell open with horror at the audacity of his proposal. Just imagine what Pittypat andMelly cowering in their beds would think, should Captain Butler come upstairs!


Mother of God, no! In here, in the parlor on that settee.


The suttee, did you say?


Ill thank you to keep a civil tongue in your head. Here. Now lay him down.


Shall I take off his boots?


No. Hes slept in them before.


She could have bitten off her tongue for that slip, for he laughed softly as he crossed Geraldslegs.


Please go, now.


He walked out into the dim hall and picked up the hat he had dropped on the doorsill.


I will be seeing you Sunday at dinner, he said and went out, closing the door noiselesslybehind him.


Scarlett at five-thirty, before the servants had in from the back yard to start breakfast,andsl(arose) ipped down the steps to the quiet lower floor.(come) Gerald was awake, sitting on thesofa, his hands gripping his bullet head as if he wished to crush it between his palms. He looked upfurtively as she entered. The pain of moving his eyes was too excruciating to be borne and hegroaned.


Wurra the day!


Its a fine way youve acted, Pa, she began in a furious whisper. Coming home at such anhour and waking all the neighbors with your singing.


I sang?


Sang! You woke the echoes singing the Lament.


Tis nothing Im remembering.


The neighbors will remember it till their dying day and so will Miss Pittypat and Melanie.


Mother of Sorrows, moaned Gerald, moving a thickly furred tongue around parched lips. Tis little Im remembering after the game started.


That laddybuck Butler bragged that he was the best poker player in


How much did you lose?


Why, I won, naturally. A drink or two helps me game.


Look in your wallet.


As if every movement was agony, Gerald removed his wallet from his coat and opened it. It wasempty and he looked at it in forlorn bewilderment.


Five hundred dollars, he said. And twas to buy things from the blockaders for Mrs. OHara,and now not even fare left to Tara.


As she looked indignantly at the empty purse, an idea took form in Scarletts mind and grewswiftly.


Ill not be holding up my head in this town, she began. Youve disgraced us all.


Hold your tongue, Puss. Can you not see me head is bursting?


Coming home drunk with a man like Captain Butler, and singing at the top of your lungs foreveryone to hear and losing all that money.


The man is too clever with cards to be a gentleman. He


What will Mother say when she hears?


He looked up in sudden anguished apprehension.


You wouldnt be telling your mother a word and upsetting her, now would you?


Scarlett said nothing but pursed her lips.


Think now how twould hurt her and her so gentle.


And to think, Pa, that you said only last night I had disgraced the family! Me, with my poorlittle dance to make money for the soldiers. Oh, I could cry.


Well, dont, pleaded Gerald.  Twould be more than me poor head could stand and sure tisbursting now.


And you said that I


Now Puss, now Puss, dont you be hurt at what your poor old father said and him not meaninga thing and not understanding a thing! Sure, youre a fine well-meaning girl, Im sure.


And wanting to take me home in disgrace.


Ah, darling, I wouldnt be doing that. Twas to tease you. You wont be mentioning the moneyto your mother and her in a flutter about expenses already?


No, said Scarlett frankly, I wont, if youll let me stay here and if youll tell Mother thattwas nothing but a lot of gossip from old cats.


Gerald looked mournfully at his daughter.


Tis blackmail, no less.


And last night was a scandal, no less.


Well, he began wheedlingly, well be forgetting all that. And do you think a fine pretty ladylike Miss Pittypat would be having any brandy in the house? The hair of the dog


Scarlett turned and tiptoed through the silent hall into the dining room to get the brandy bottlethat she and Melly privately called the swoon bottle because Pittypat always took a sip from itwhen her fluttering heart made her faintor seem to faint. Triumph was written on her face and notrace of shame for her unfilial treatment of Gerald. Now Ellen would be soothed with lies if any other busybody wrote her. Now she could stay in Atlanta. Now she could do almost as she pleased,Pittypat being the weak vessel that she was. She unlocked the cellaret and stood for a moment withthe bottle and glass pressed to her bosom.


She saw a long vista of picnics by the bubbling waters of Peachtree Creek and barbecues atStone Mountain, receptions and balls, afternoon danceables, buggy rides and Sunday-night buffetsuppers. She would be there, right in the heart of things, right in the center of a crowd of men. Andmen fell in love so easily, after you did little things for them at the hospital. She wouldnt mind thehospital so much now. Men were so easily stirred when they had been ill. They fell into a clevergirls hand just like the ripe peaches at Tara when the trees were gently shaken.


She went back toward her father with me reviving liquor, thanking Heaven that the famousOHara head had not been able to survive last nights bout and wondering suddenly if Rhett Butlerhad had anything to do with that.


----""----------------""----"""


----""----------------"


""""--------""----


""----""----