Chapter 43


IT WAS ONE of those rare December days when the sun was almost as warm as Indian summer.


Dry red leaves still clung to the oak in Aunt Pittys yard and a faint yellow green still persisted inthe dying grass. Scarlett, with the baby in her arms, stepped out onto the side porch and sat downin a rocking chair in a patch of sunshine. She was wearing a new green challis dress trimmed withyards and yards of black rickrack braid and a new lace house cap which Aunt Pitty had made forher. Both were very becoming to her and she knew it and took great pleasure in them. How good itwas to look pretty again after the long months of looking so dreadful!


As she sat rocking the baby and humming to herself, she heard the sound of hooves coming upthe side street and, peering curiously through the tangle of dead vines on the porch, she saw RhettButler riding toward the house.


He had been away from Atlanta for months, since just after Gerald died, since long before Ella Lorena was born. She had missed him but she now wished ardently that there was some way toavoid seeing him. In fact, the sight of his dark face brought a feeling of guilty panic to her breast. Amatter in which Ashley was concerned lay on her conscience and she did not wish to discuss itwith Rhett, but she knew he would force the discussion, no matter how disinclined she might be.


He drew up at the gate and swung lightly to the ground and she thought, staring nervously athim, that he looked just like an illustration in a book Wade was always pestering her to read aloud.


All he needs is earrings and a cutlass between his teeth, she thought. Well, pirate or no, hesnot going to cut my throat today if I can help it.


As he came up the walk she called a greeting to him, summoning her sweetest smile. How luckythat she had on her new dress and the becoming cap and looked so pretty! As his eyes went swiftlyover her, she knew he thought her pretty, too.


A new baby! Why, Scarlett, this is a surprise! he laughed, leaning down to push the blanketaway from Ella Lorenas small ugly face.


Dont be silly, she said, blushing. How are you, Rhett? Youve been away a long time.


So I have. Let me hold the baby, Scarlett. Oh, I know how to hold babies. I have many strangeaccomplishments. Well, he certainly looks like Frank. All except the whiskers, but give him time.


I hope not. Its a girl.


A girl? Thats better still. Boys are such nuisances. Dont ever have any more boys, Scarlett.


It was on the tip of her tongue to reply tartly that she never intended to have any more babies,boys or girls, but she caught herself in time and smiled, casting about quickly in her mind for sometopic of conversation that would put off the bad moment when the subject she feared would comeup for discussion.


Did you have a nice trip, Rhett? Where did you go this time?


OhCubaNew Orleansother places. Here, Scarlett, take the baby. Shes beginning toslobber and I cant get to my handkerchief. Shes a fine baby, Im sure, but shes wetting my shirtbosom.


She took the child back into her lap and Rhett settled himself lazily on the banister and took acigar from a silver case.


You are always going to New Orleans, she said and pouted a little. And you never will tellme what you do there.


I am a hard-working man, Scarlett, and perhaps my business takes me there.


Hard-working! You! she laughed impertinently. You never worked in your life. Youre toolazy. All you ever do is finance Carpetbaggers in their thieving and take half the profits and bribeYankee officials to let you in on schemes to rob us taxpayers.


He threw back his head and laughed.


And how you would love to have money enough to bribe officials, so you could do likewise!


The very idea She began to ruffle.


But perhaps you will make enough money to get into bribery on a large scale some day. Maybeyoull get rich off those convicts you leased.


Oh, she said, a little disconcerted, how did you find out about my gang so soon?


I arrived last night and spent the evening in the Girl of the Period Saloon, where one hears allthe news of the town. Its a clearing house for gossip. Better than a ladies sewing circle. Everyonetold me that youd leased a gang and put that little plug-ugly, Gallegher, in charge to work them todeath.


Thats a lie, she said angrily. He wont work them to death. Ill see to that


Will you?


Of course I will! How can you even insinuate such things?


Oh, I do beg your pardon, Mrs. Kennedy! I know your motives are always above reproach.


However, Johnnie Gallegher is a cold little bully if I ever saw one. Better watch him or youll behaving trouble when the inspector comes around.


You tend to your business and Ill tend to mine, she said indignantly. And I dont want to talkabout convicts any more. Everybodys been hateful about them. My gang is my own businessAnd you havent told me yet what you do in New Orleans. You go there so often that everybodysays She paused. She had not intended to say so much.


What do they say?


Wellthat you have a sweetheart there. That you are going to get married. Are you, Rhett?


She had been curious about this for so long that she could not refrain from asking the point-blank question. A queer little pang of jealousy jabbed at her at the thought of Rhett getting married,although why that should be she did not know.


His bland eyes grew suddenly alert and he caught her gaze and held it until a little blush crept upinto her cheeks.


Would it matter much to you?


Well, I should hate to lose your friendship, she said primly and, with an attempt atdisinterestedness, bent down to pull the blanket closer about Ella Lorenas head.


He laughed suddenly, shortly, and said: Look at me, Scarlett.


She looked up unwillingly, her blush deepening.


You can tell your curious friends that when I marry it will be because I couldnt get the womanI wanted in any other way. And Ive never yet wanted a woman bad enough to marry her.


Now she was indeed confused and embarrassed, for she remembered the night on this veryporch during the siege when he had said: I am not a marrying man and casually suggested thatshe become his mistressremembered, too, the terrible day when he was in jail and was shamedby the memory. A slow malicious smile went over his face as he read her eyes.


But I will satisfy your vulgar curiosity since you ask such pointed questions. It isnt asweetheart that takes me to New Orleans. Its a child, a little boy.


A little boy! The shock of this unexpected information wiped out her confusion.


Yes, he is my legal ward and I am responsible for him. Hes in school in New Orleans. I gothere frequently to see him.


And take him presents? So, she thought, thats how he always knows what kind of presentsWade likes!


Yes, he said shortly, unwillingly.


Well, I never! Is he handsome?


Too handsome for his own good.


Is he a nice little boy?


No. Hes a perfect hellion. I wish he had never been born. Boys are troublesome creatures. Isthere anything else youd like to know?


He looked suddenly angry and his brow was dark, as though he already regretted speaking of thematter at all.


Well, not if you dont want to tell me any more, she said loftily, though she was burning forfurther information. But I just cant see you in the r.le of a guardian, and she laughed, hoping todisconcert him.


No, I dont suppose you can. Your vision is pretty limited.


He said no more and smoked his cigar in silence for a while. She cast about for some remark asrude as his but could think of none.


I would appreciate it if youd say nothing of this to anyone, he said finally. Though I supposethat asking a woman to keep her mouth shut is asking the impossible.


I can keep a secret, she said with injured dignity.


Can you? Its nice to learn unsuspected things about friends. Now, stop pouting, Scarlett. Imsorry I was rude but you deserved it for prying. Give me a smile and lets be pleasant for a minuteor two before I take up an unpleasant subject.


Oh, dear! she thought. Now, hes going to talk about Ashley and the mill! and she hastened tosmile and show her dimple to divert him. Where else did you go, Rhett? You havent been in NewOrleans all this time, have you?


No, for the last month Ive been in Charleston. My father died.


Oh, Im sorry.


Dont be. Im sure he wasnt sorry to die, and Im sure Im not sorry hes dead.


Rhett, what a dreadful thing to say!


It would be much more dreadful if I pretended to be sorry, when I wasnt, wouldnt it? Therewas never any love lost between us. I cannot remember when the old gentleman did not disapproveof me. I was too much like his own father and he disapproved heartily of his father. And as I grewolder his disapproval of me became downright dislike, which, I admit, I did little to change. All the things Father wanted me to do and be were such boring things. And finally he threw me out intothe world without a cent and no training whatsoever to be anything but a Charleston gentleman, agood pistol shot and an excellent poker player. And he seemed to take it as a personal affront that Idid not starve but put my poker playing to excellent advantage and supported myself royally bygambling.


He was so affronted at a Butler becoming a gambler that when I came home for the firsttime, he forbade my mother to see me. And all during the war when I was blockading out ofCharleston, Mother had to lie and slip off to see me. Naturally that didnt increase my love forhim.


Oh, I didnt know all that!


He was what is pointed out as a fine old gentleman of the old school which means that he wasignorant, thick headed, intolerant and incapable of thinking along any lines except what othergentlemen of the old school thought. Everyone admired him tremendously for having cut me offand counted me as dead. If thy right eye offend thee, pluck it out. I was his right eye, his oldestson, and he plucked me out with a vengeance.


He smiled a little, his eyes hard with amused memory.


Well, I could forgive all that but I cant forgive what hes done to Mother and my sister sincethe war ended. Theyve been practically destitute. The plantation house was burned and the ricefields have gone back to marsh lands. And the town house went for taxes and theyve been livingin two rooms that arent fit for darkies. Ive sent money to Mother, but Father has sent it backtainted money, you see!and several times Ive gone to Charleston and given money, on the sly,to my sister. But Father always found out and raised merry hell with her, till her life wasnt worthliving, poor girl. And back the money came to me. I dont know how theyve lived. ... Yes, I doknow. My brothers given what he could, though he hasnt much to give and he wont takeanything from me eitherspeculators money is unlucky money, you see! And the charity of theirfriends. Your Aunt Eulalie, shes been very kind.


Shes one of Mothers best friends, you know.


Shes given them clothes and Good God! My mother on charity!


It was one of the few times she had ever seen him with his mask off, his face hard with honesthatred for his father and distress for his mother.


Aunt Lalie! But, good Heavens, Rhett, she hasnt got anything much above what I send her!


Ah, so thats where it comes from! How ill bred of you, my dear, to brag of such a thing in theface of my humiliation. You must let me reimburse you!


With pleasure, said Scarlett, her mouth suddenly twisting into a grin, and he smiled back.


Ah, Scarlett, how the thought of a dollar does make your eyes sparkle! Are you sure youhavent some Scotch or perhaps Jewish blood as well as Irish?


Dont be hateful! I didnt mean to throw it in your face about Aunt Lalie. But honestly, shethinks Im made of money. Shes always writing me for more and, God knows, Ive got enough onmy hands without supporting all of Charleston. What did your father die of?


Genteel starvation, I thinkand hope. It served him right. He was willing to let Mother andRosemary starve with him. Now that hes dead, I can help them. Ive bought them a house on the Battery and theyve servants to look after them. But of course, they couldnt let it be known thatthe money came from me.


Why not?


My dear, surely you know Charleston! Youve visited there. My family may be poor but theyhave a position to uphold. And they couldnt uphold it if it were known that gambling money andspeculators money and Carpetbag money was behind it. No, they gave it out that Father left anenormous life insurancethat hed beggared himself and starved himself to death to keep up thepayments, so that after he died, theyd be provided for. So he is looked upon as an even greatergentleman of the old school than before. ... In fact, a martyr to his family. I hope hes turning in hisgrave at the knowledge that Mother and Rosemary are comfortable now, in spite of his efforts. ...


In a way, Im sorry hes dead because he wanted to die was so glad to die.


Oh, he really died when Lee surrendered. You know the type. He never could adjust himself tothe new times and spent his time talking about the good old days.


Rhett, are all old folks like that? She was thinking of Gerald and what Will had said abouthim.


Heavens, no! Just look at your Uncle Henry and that old wild cat, Mr. Merriwether, just toname two. They took a new lease on life when they marched out with the Home Guard and itseems to me that theyve gotten younger and more peppery ever since. I met old man Merriwetherthis morning driving Renés pie wagon and cursing the horse like an army mule skinner. He toldme he felt ten years younger since he escaped from the house and his daughter-in-laws coddlingand took to driving the wagon. And your Uncle Henry enjoys fighting the Yankees in court and outand defending the widow and the orphanfree of charge, I fearagainst the Carpetbaggers. Ifthere hadnt been a war, hed have retired long ago and nursed his rheumatism. Theyre youngagain because they are of use again and feel that they are needed. And they like this new day thatgives old men another chance.


But there are plenty of people, young people, who feel like myfather and your father. They cant and wont adjust and that brings me to the unpleasant subject Iwant to discuss with you, Scarlett.


His sudden shift so disconcerted her that she stammered: Whatwhat and inwardlygroaned: Oh, Lord! Now, its coming. I wonder if I can butter him down?


I shouldnt have expected either truth or honor or fair dealing from you, knowing you as I do.


But foolishly, I trusted you.


I dont know what you mean.


I think you do. At any rate, you look very guilty. As I was riding along Ivy Street a white ago,on my way to call on you, who should hail me from behind a hedge but Mrs. Ashley Wilkes! Ofcourse, I stopped and chatted with her.


Yes, we had an enjoyable talk. She told me she had always wanted to let me know how braveshe thought I was to have struck a blow for the Confederacy, even at the eleventh hour.


Oh, fiddle-dee-dee! Mellys a fool. She might have died that night because you acted soheroic.


I imagine she would have thought her life given in a good cause. And when I asked her whatshe was doing in Atlanta she looked quite surprised at my ignorance and told me that they wereliving here now and that you had been kind enough to make Mr. Wilkes a partner in your mill.


Well, what of it? questioned Scarlett, shortly.


When I lent you the money to buy that mill I made one stipulation, to which you agreed, andthat was that it should not go to the support of Ashley Wilkes.


You are being very offensive. Ive paid you back your money and I own the mill and what I dowith it is my own business.


Would you mind telling me how you made the money to pay back my loan?


I made it selling lumber, of course.


You made it with the money I lent you to give you your start. Thats what you mean. Mymoney is being used to support Ashley. You are a woman quite without honor and if you hadntrepaid my loan, Id take great pleasure in calling it in now and selling you out at public auction ifyou couldnt pay.


He spoke lightly but there was anger flickering in his eyes.


Scarlett hastily carried the warfare into the enemys territory.


Why do you hate Ashley so much? I believe youre jealous of him.


After she had spoken she could have bitten her tongue, for he threw back his head and laugheduntil she went red with mortification.


Add conceit to dishonor, he said. Youll never get over being the belle of the County, willyou? Youll always think youre the cutest little trick in shoe leather and that every man you meetis expiring for love of you.


I dont either! she cried hotly. But I just cant see why you hate Ashley so much and thatsthe only explanation I can think of.


Well, think something else, pretty charmer, for thats the wrong explanation. And as for hatingAshley I dont hate him any more than I like him. In fact, my only emotion toward him and hiskind is pity.


Yes, and a little contempt. Now, swell up like a gobbler and tell me that he is worth a thousandblackguards like me and that I shouldnt dare to be so presumptuous as to feel either pity orcontempt for him. And when you have finished swelling, Ill tell you what I mean, if youreinterested.


Well, Im not.


I shall tell you, just the same, for I cant bear for you to go on nursing your pleasant delusion ofmy jealousy. I pity him because he ought to be dead and he isnt. And I have a contempt for him because he doesnt know what to do with himself now that his world is gone.


There was something familiar in the idea he expressed. She had a confused memory of havingbeard similar words but she could not remember when and where. She did not think very hardabout it for her anger was hot.


If you had your way all the decent men in the South would be dead!


And if they had their way, I think Ashleys kind would prefer to be dead. Dead with neat stonesabove them, saying: Here lies a soldier of the Confederacy, dead for the Southland or Dulce etdecorum est or any of the other popular epitaphs.


I dont see why!


You never see anything that isnt written in letters a foot high and then shoved under your nose,do you? If they were dead, their troubles would be over, thered be no problems to face, problemsthat have no solutions. Moreover, their families would be proud of them through countlessgenerations. And Ive heard the dead are happy. Do you suppose Ashley Wilkes is happy?


Why, of course she began and then she remembered the look in Ashleys eyes recently andstopped.


Is he happy or Hugh Elsing or Dr. Meade? Any more than my father and your father werehappy?


Well, perhaps not as happy as they might be, because theyve all lost their money.


He laughed.


It isnt losing their money, my pet. I tell you its losing their worldthe world they were raisedin. Theyre like fish out of water or cats with wings. They were raised to be certain persons, to docertain things, to occupy certain niches. And those persons and things and niches disappearedforever when General Lee arrived at Appomattox. Oh, Scarlett, dont look so stupid! What is therefor Ashley Wilkes to do, now that his home is gone and his plantation taken up for taxes and finegentlemen are going twenty for a penny? Can he work with his head or his hands? Ill bet youvelost money hand over fist since he took over that mill.


I have not!


How nice. May I look over your books some Sunday evening when you are at leisure?


You can go to the devil and not at your leisure. You can go now, for all I care.


My pet, Ive been to the devil and hes a very dull fellow. I wont go there again, even foryou. ... You took my money when you needed it desperately and you used it. We had an agreementas to how it should be used and you have broken that agreement. Just remember, my precious littlecheat, the time will come when you win want to borrow more money from me. Youll want me tobank you, at some incredibly low interest, so you can buy more mills and more mules and buildmore saloons. And you can whistle for the money.


When I need money Ill borrow it from the bank, thank you, she said coldly, but her breastwas heaving with rage.


Will you? Try to do it. I own plenty of stock in the bank.


You do?


Yes, I am interested in some honest enterprises.


There are other banks


Plenty of them. And if I can manage it, youll play hell getting a cent from any of them. Youcan go to the Carpetbag usurers if you want money.


Ill go to them with pleasure.


Youll go but with little pleasure when you learn their rates of interest. My pretty, there arepenalties in the business world for crooked dealing. You should have played straight with me.


Youre a fine man, arent you? So rich and powerful yet picking on people who are down, likeAshley and me!


Dont put yourself in his class. You arent down. Nothing will down you. But he is down andhell stay there unless theres some energetic person behind him, guiding and protecting him aslong as he lives. Im of no mind to have my money used for the benefit of such a person.


You didnt mind helping me and I was down and


You were a good risk, my dear, an interesting risk. Why? Because you didnt plump yourselfdown on your male relatives and sob for the old days. You got out and hustled and now yourfortunes are firmly planted on money stolen from a dead mans wallet and money stolen from theConfederacy. Youve got murder to your credit, and husband stealing, attempted fornication, lyingand sharp dealing and any amount of chicanery that wont bear close inspection. Admirable things,all of them. They show you to be a person of energy and determination and a good money risk. Itsentertaining, helping people who help themselves. Id lend ten thousand dollars without even anote to that old Roman matron, Mrs. Merriwether. She started with a basket of pies and look at hernow! A bakery employing half a dozen people, old Grandpa happy with his delivery wagon andthat lazy little Creole, René, working hard and liking it. ...


Or that poor devil, Tommy Wellburn,who does two mens work with half a mans body and does it well orwell, I wont go on andbore you.


You do bore me. You bore me to distraction, said Scarlett coldly, hoping to annoy him anddivert him from the ever-unfortunate subject of Ashley. But he only laughed shortly and refused totake up the gauntlet.


People like them are worth helping. But Ashley Wilkesbah! His breed is of no use or value inan upside-down world like ours. Whenever the world up-ends, his kind is the first to perish. Andwhy not? They dont deserve to survive because they wont fightdont know how to fight. Thisisnt the first time the worlds been upside down and it wont be the last. Its happened before anditll happen again. And when it does happen, everyone loses everything and everyone is equal. Andthen they all start again at taw, with nothing at all. That is, nothing except the cunning of theirbrains and strength of their hands. But some people, like Ashley, have neither cunning nor strengthor, having them, scruple to use them. And so they go under and they should go under. Its a naturallaw and the world is better off without them.


But there are always a hardy few who come through and given time, they are right back where they were before the world turned over.


Youve been poor! You just said that your father turned you out without a penny! said Scarlett,furious. I should think youd understand and sympathize with Ashley!


I do understand; said Rhett, but Im damned if I sympathize. After the surrender Ashley hadmuch more than I had when I was thrown out. At least, he had friends who took him in, whereas Iwas Ishmael. But what has Ashley done with himself?


If you are comparing him with yourself, you conceited thing, why Hes not like you, thankGod! He wouldnt soil his hands as you do, making money with Carpetbaggers and Scalawags andYankees. Hes scrupulous and honorable!


But not too scrupulous and honorable to take aid and money from a woman.


What else could he have done?


Who am I to say? I only know what I did, both when I was thrown out and nowadays. I onlyknow what other men have done. We saw opportunity in the ruin of a civilization and we made themost of our opportunity, some honestly, some shadily, and we are still making the most of it. Butthe Ashleys of this world have the same chances and dont take them. They just arent smart,Scarlett, and only the smart deserve to survive.


She hardly heard what he was saying, for now there was coming back to her the exact memorywhich had teased her a few minutes before when he first began speaking. She remembered the coldwind that swept the orchard of Tara and Ashley standing by a pile of rails, his eyes looking beyondher. And he had saidwhat? Some funny foreign name that sounded like profanity and had talkedof the end of the world. She had not known what he meant then but now bewilderedcomprehension was coming to her and with it a sick, weary feeling.


Why, Ashley said


Once at Tara he said something about theadusk of the gods and about the end of the worldand some such foolishness.


Ah, the G.tterd.mmerung! Rhetts eyes were sharp with interest. And what else?


Oh, I dont remember exactly. I wasnt paying much mind. Butyessomething about thestrong coining through and the weak being winnowed out.


Ah, so he knows. Then that makes it harder for him. Most of them dont know and will neverknow. Theyll wonder all their lives where the lost enchantment has vanished. Theyll simplysuffer in proud and incompetent silence. But he understands. He knows hes winnowed out.


Oh, he isnt! Not while Ive got breath in my body.


He looked at her quietly and his brown face was smooth.


Scarlett, how did you manage to get his consent to come to Atlanta and take over the mill? Didhe struggle very hard against you?


She had a quick memory of the scene with Ashley after Geralds funeral and put it from her.


Why, of course not, she replied indignantly. When I explained to him that I needed his helpbecause I didnt trust that scamp who was running the mill and Frank was too busy to help me andI was going towell, there was Ella Lorena, you see. He was very glad to help me out.


Sweet are the uses of motherhood! So thats how you got around him. Well, youve got himwhere you want him now, poor devil, as shackled to you by obligations as any of your convicts areby their chains. And I wish you both joy. But, as I said at the beginning of this discussion, youllnever get another cent out of me for any of your little unladylike schemes, my double-dealinglady.


She was smarting with anger and with disappointment as well. For some time she had beenplanning to borrow more money from Rhett to buy a lot downtown and start a lumber yard there.


I can do without your money, she cried. Im making money out of Johnnie Galleghers mill,plenty of it, now that I dont use free darkies and I have some money out on mortgages and we arecoining cash at the store from the darky trade.


Yes, so I heard. How clever of you to rook the helpless and the widow and the orphan and theignorant! But if you must steal, Scarlett, why not steal from the rich and strong instead of the poorand weak? From Robin Hood on down to now, thats been considered highly moral.


Because, said Scarlett shortly, its a sight easier and safer to stealas you call itfrom thepoor.


He laughed silently, his shoulders shaking.


Youre a fine honest rogue, Scarlett!


A rogue! Queer that that term should hurt. She wasnt a rogue, she told herself vehemently. Atleast, that wasnt what she wanted to be. She wanted to be a great lady. For a moment her mindwent swiftly down the years and she saw her mother, moving with a sweet swish of skirts and afaint fragrance of sachet, her small busy hands tireless in the service of others, loved, respected,cherished. And suddenly her heart was sick.


If you are trying to devil me, she said tiredly, its no use. I know Im not asscrupulous as Ishould be these days. Not as kind and as pleasant as I was brought up to be. But I cant help it,Rhett. Truly, I cant. What else could I have done? What would have happened to me, to Wade, toTara and all of us if Id beengentle when that Yankee came to Tara? I should have beenbut Idont even want to think of that. And when Jonas Wilkerson was going to take the home place,suppose Id beenkind and scrupulous? Where would we all be now? And if Id been sweet andsimple minded and not nagged Frank about bad debts wedoh, well. Maybe I am a rogue, but Iwont be a rogue forever, Rhett. But during these past yearsand even nowwhat else could Ihave done? How else could I have acted?


Ive felt that I was trying to row a heavily loaded boat ina storm. Ive had so much trouble just trying to keep afloat that I couldnt be bothered about thingsthat didnt matter, things I could part with easily and not miss, like good manners andwell,things like that. Ive been too afraid my boat would be swamped and so Ive dumped overboard thethings that seemed least important.


Pride and honor and truth and virtue and kindliness, he enumerated silkily. You are right,Scarlett. They arent important when a boat is sinking. But look around you at your friends. Either they are bringing their boats ashore safely with cargoes intact or they are content to go down withall flags flying.


They are a passel of fools, she said shortly. Theres a time for all things. When Ive gotplenty of money, Ill be nice as you please, too. Butter wont melt in my mouth. I can afford to bethen.


You can afford to bebut you wont. Its hard to salvage jettisoned cargo and, if it is retrieved,its usually irreparably damaged. And I fear that when you can afford to fish up the honor andvirtue and kindness youve thrown overboard, youll find they have suffered a sea change and not,I fear, into something rich and strange. ...


He rose suddenly and picked up his hat.


You are going?


Yes. Arent you relieved? I leave you to what remains of your conscience.


He paused and looked down at the baby, putting out a finger for the child to grip.


I suppose Frank is bursting with pride?


Oh, of course.


Has a lot of plans for this baby, I suppose?


Oh, well, you know how silly men are about their babies.


Then, tell him, said Rhett and stopped short, an odd look on his face, tell him if he wants tosee his plans for his child work out, hed better stay home at night more often than hes doing.


What do you mean?


Just what I say. Tell him to stay home.


Oh, you vile creature! To insinuate that poor Frank would


Oh, good Lord! Rhett broke into a roar of laughter. I didnt mean he was running around withwomen! Frank! Oh, good Lord!


He went down the steps still laughing.


"--------"


""""""""""


----------------"


""----""--------""""


----"--------""""""""""


""""""----""""


"""----"""""


"----"----""


"""""----""