Chapter 32


SHE WAS STILL CLUTCHING the ball of red clay when she went up the front steps. She hadcarefully avoided the back entrance, for Mammys sharp eyes would certainly have seen thatsomething was greatly amiss. Scarlett did not want to see Mammy or anyone else. She did not feelthat she could endure seeing anyone or talking to anyone again. She had no feeling of shame ordisappointment or bitterness now, only a weakness of the knees and a great emptiness of heart. Shesqueezed the clay so tightly it ran out from her clenched fist and she said over and over, parrot-like: Ive still got this. Yes, Ive still got this.


There was nothing else she did have, nothing but this red land, this land she had been willing tothrow away like a torn handkerchief only a few minutes before, Now, it was dear to her again and she wondered dully what madness had possessed her to hold it so lightly. Had Ashley yielded, shecould have gone away with him and left family and friends without a backward look but, even inher emptiness, she knew it would have torn her heart to leave these dear red hills and long washedgullies and gaunt black pines. Her thoughts would have turned back to them hungrily until the dayshe died. Not even Ashley could have filled the empty spaces in her heart where Tara. had beenuprooted. How wise Ashley was and how well he knew her! He had only to press the damp earthinto her hand to bring her to her senses.


She was in the hall preparing to close the door when she heard the sound of horses hooves andturned to look down the driveway. To have visitors at this of all times was too much. Shed hurryto her room and plead a headache.


But when the carriage came nearer, her flight was checked by her amazement. It was a newcarriage, shiny with varnish, and the harness was new too, with bits of polished brass here andthere. Strangers, certainly. No one she knew had the money for such a grand new turn-out as this.


She stood in the doorway watching, the cold draft blowing her skirts about her damp ankles.


Then the carriage stopped in front of the house and Jonas Wilkerson alighted. Scarlett was sosurprised at the sight of their former overseer driving so fine a rig and in so splendid a greatcoatshe could not for a moment believe her eyes. Will had told her he looked quite prosperous since hegot his new job with the Freedmens Bureau. Made a lot of money, Will said, swindling the niggersor the government, one or tuther, or confiscating folks cotton and swearing it was Confederategovernment cotton. Certainly he never came by all that money honestly in these hard times.


And here he was now, stepping out of an elegant carriage and handing down a woman dressedwithin an inch of her life. Scarlett saw in a glance that the dress was bright in color to the point ofvulgarity but nevertheless her eyes went over the outfit hungrily. It had been so long since she hadeven seen stylish new clothes. Well! So hoops arent so wide this year, she thought, scanning thered plaid gown. And, as she took in the black velvet paletot, how short jackets are! And what acunning hat! Bonnets must be out of style, for this hat was only an absurd flat red velvet affair,perched on the top of the womans head like a stiffened pancake.


The ribbons did not tie under thechin as bonnet ribbons tied but in the back under the massive bunch of curls which fell from therear of the hat, curls which Scarlett could not help noticing did not match the womans hair ineither color or texture.


As the woman stepped to the ground and looked toward the house, Scarlett saw there wassomething familiar about the rabbity face, caked with white powder.


Why, its Emmie Slattery! she cried, so surprised she spoke the words aloud.


Yesm, its me, said Emmie, tossing her head with an ingratiating smile and starting towardthe steps.


Emmie Slattery! The dirty tow-headed slut whose illegitimate baby Ellen had baptized, Emmiewho had given typhoid to Ellen and killed her. This overdressed, common, nasty piece of poorwhite trash was coming up the steps of Tara, bridling and grinning as if she belonged here. Scarlettthought of Ellen and, in a rush, feeling came back into the emptiness of her mind, a murderousrage so strong it shook her like the ague.


Get off those steps, you trashy wench! she cried. Get off this land! Get out!


Emmies jaw sagged suddenly and she glanced at Jonas who came up with lowering brows. Hemade an effort at dignity, despite his anger.


You must not speak that way to my wife, he said.


Wife? said Scarlett and burst into a laugh that was cutting with contempt. High time youmade her your wife. Who baptized your other brats after you killed my mother?


Emmie said Oh! and retreated hastily down the steps but Jonas stopped her flight toward thecarriage with a rough grip on her arm.


We came out here to pay a calla friendly call, he snarled. And talk a little business with oldfriends


Friends? Scarletts voice was like a whiplash. When were we ever friends with the like ofyou? The Slatterys lived on our charity and paid it back by killing Motherand youyou Padischarged you about Emmies brat and you know it. Friends? Get off this place before I call Mr.


Benteen and Mr. Wilkes.


Under the words, Emmie broke her husbands hold and fled for the carriage, scrambling in witha flash of patent-leather boots with bright-red tops and red tassels.


Now Jonas shook with a fury equal to Scarletts and his sallow face was as red as an angryturkey gobblers.


Still high and mighty, arent you? Well, I know all about you. I know you havent got shoes foryour feet. I know your fathers turned idiot


Get off this place!


Oh, you wont sing that way very long. I know youre broke. I know you cant even pay yourtaxes. I came out here to offer to buy this place from youto make you a right good offer. Emmiehad a hankering to live here. But, by God, I wont give you a cent now! You highflying, bog-trotting Irish will find out whos running things around here when you get sold out for taxes. AndIll buy this place, lock, stock and barrelfurniture and alland Ill live in it.


So it was Jonas Wilkerson who wanted TaraJonas and Emmie, who in some twisted waythought to even past slights by living in the home where they had been slighted. All her nerveshummed with hate, as they had hummed that day when she shoved the pistol barrel into theYankees bearded face and fired. She wished she had that pistol now.


Ill tear this house down, stone by stone, and burn it and sow every acre with salt before I seeeither of you put foot over this threshold, she shouted. Get out, I tell you! Get out!


Jonas glared at her, started to say more and then walked toward the carriage. He climbed inbeside his whimpering wife and turned the horse. As they drove off, Scarlett had the impulse tospit at them. She did spit. She knew it was a common, childish gesture but it made her feel better.


She wished she had done it while they could see her.


Those damned nigger lovers daring to come here and taunt her about her poverty! That houndnever intended offering her a price for Tara. He just used that as an excuse to come and flaunt himself and Emmie in her face. The dirty Scalawags, the lousy trashy poor whites, boasting theywould live at Tara!


Then, sudden terror struck her and her rage melted. Gods nightgown! They will come and livehere! There was nothing she could do to keep them from buying Tara, nothing to keep them fromlevying on every mirror and table and bed, on Ellens shining mahogany and rosewood, and everybit of it precious to her, scarred though it was by the Yankee raiders. And the Robillard silver too. Iwont let them do it, thought Scarlett vehemently. No, not if Ive got to burn the place down!


Emmie Slattery will never set her foot on a single bit of flooring Mother ever walked on!


She closed the door and leaned against it and she was very frightened. More frightened eventhan she had been that day when Shermans army was in the house. That day the worst she couldfear was that Tara would be burned over her head. But this was worsethese low commoncreatures living in this house, bragging to their low common friends how they had turned the proudOHaras out. Perhaps theyd even bring negroes here to dine and sleep. Will had told her Jonasmade a great to-do about being equal with the negroes, ate with them, visited in their houses, rodethem around with him in his carriage, put his arms around their shoulders.


When she thought of the possibility of this final insult to Tara, her heart pounded so hard shecould scarcely breathe. She was trying to get her mind on her problem, trying to figure some wayout, but each time she collected her thoughts, fresh gusts of rage and fear shook her. There must besome way out, there must be someone somewhere who had money she could borrow. Moneycouldnt just dry up and blow away. Somebody had to have money. Then the laughing words ofAshley came back to her:


Only one person, Rhett Butler  who has money.


Rhett Butler. She walked quickly into the parlor and shut the door behind her. The dim gloom ofdrawn blinds and winter twilight closed about her. No one would think of hunting for her here andshe wanted time to think, undisturbed. The idea which had just occurred to her was so simple shewondered why she had not thought of it before.


Ill get the money from Rhett. Ill sell him the diamond earbobs. Or Ill borrow the money fromhim and let him keep the earbobs till I can pay him back.


For a moment, relief was so great she felt weak. She would pay the taxes and laugh in JonasWilkersons face. But close on this happy thought came relentless knowledge.


Its not only for this year that Ill need tax money. Theres next year and all the years of my life.


If I pay up this time, theyll raise the taxes higher next time till they drive me out. If I make a goodcotton crop, theyll tax it till Ill get nothing for it or maybe confiscate it outright and say itsConfederate cotton. The Yankees and the scoundrels teamed up with them have got me where theywant me. All my life, as long as I live, Ill be afraid theyll get me somehow. All my life Ill bescared and scrambling for money and working myself to death, only to see my work go for nothingand my cotton stolen. ... Just borrowing three hundred dollars for the taxes will be only a stopgap.


What I want is to get out of this fix, for goodso I can go to sleep at night without worrying overwhats going to happen to me tomorrow, and next month, and next year.


Her mind ticked on steadily. Coldly and logically an idea grew in her brain. She thought of Rhett, a flash of white teeth against swarthy skin, sardonic black eyes caressing her. She recalledthe hot night in Atlanta, close to the end of the siege, when he sat on Aunt Pittys porch half hiddenin the summer darkness, and she felt again the heat of his hand upon her arm as he said: I wantyou more than I have ever wanted any womanand Ive waited longer for you than Ive everwaited for any woman.


Ill marry him, she thought coolly. And then Ill never have to bother about money again.


Oh, blessed thought, sweeter than hope of Heaven, never to worry about money again, to knowthat Tara was safe, that the family was fed and clothed, that she would never again have to bruiseherself against stone walls!


She felt very old. The afternoons events had drained her of all feeling, first the startling newsabout the taxes, then Ashley and, last, her murderous rage at Jonas Wilkerson. Now there was noemotion left in her. If all her capacity to feel had not been utterly exhausted, something in herwould have protested against the plan taking form in her mind, for she hated Rhett as she hated noother person in all the world. But she could not feel. She could only think and her thoughts werevery practical.


I said some terrible things to him that night when he deserted us on the road, but I can makehim forget them, she thought contemptuously, still sure of her power to charm. Butter wont meltin my mouth when Im around him. Ill make him think I always loved him and was just upset andfrightened that night. Oh, men are so conceited theyll believe anything that flatters them. ... I mustnever let him dream what straits were in, not till Ive got him. Oh, he mustnt know! If he evensuspected how poor we are, hed know it was his money I wanted and not himself. After all, theresno way he could know, for even Aunt Pitty doesnt know the worst. And after Ive married him,hell have to help us. He cant let his wifes people starve. His wife. Mrs. Rhett Butler. Somethingof repulsion, buried deep beneath her cold thinking, stirred faintly and then was stilled.


Sheremembered the embarrassing and disgusting events of her brief honeymoon with Charles, hisfumbling hands, his awkwardness, his incomprehensible emotionsand Wade Hampton.


I wont think about it now. Ill bother about it after Ive married him. ...


After she had married him. Memory rang a bell. A chill went down her spine. She rememberedagain that night on Aunt Pittys porch, remembered how she asked him if he was proposing to her,remembered how hatefully he had laughed and said: My dear, Im not a marrying man.


Suppose he was still not a marrying man. Suppose despite all her charms and wiles, he refusedto marry her. Supposeoh, terrible thought!suppose he had completely forgotten about her andwas chasing after some other woman.


I want you more than I have ever wanted any woman. ...


Scarletts nails dug into her palms as she clenched her fists. If hes forgotten me, Ill make himremember me. Ill make him want me again.


And, if he would not marry her but still wanted her, there was a way to get the money. After all,he had once asked her to be his mistress.


In the dim grayness of the parlor she fought a quick decisive battle with the three most binding ties of her soulthe memory of Ellen, the teachings of her religion and her love for Ashley. Sheknew that what she had in her mind must be hideous to her mother even in that warm far-offHeaven where she surely was. She knew that fornication was a mortal sin. And she knew that,loving Ashley as she did, her plan was doubly prostitution.


But all these things went down before the merciless coldness of her mind and the goad ofdesperation. Ellen was dead and perhaps death gave an understanding of all things. Religionforbade fornication on pain of hell fire but if the Church thought she was going to leave one stoneunturned in saving Tara and saving the family from starvingwell, let the Church bother aboutthat. She wouldnt. At least, not now. And AshleyAshley didnt want her. Yes, he did want her.


The memory of his warm mouth on hers told her that. But he would never take her away with him.


Strange that going away with Ashley did not seem like a sin, but with RhettIn the dull twilight of the winter afternoon she came to the end of the long road which had begunthe night Atlanta fell. She had set her feet upon that road a spoiled, selfish and untried girl, full ofyouth, warm of emotion, easily bewildered by life. Now, at the end of the road, there was nothingleft of that girl. Hunger and hard labor, fear and constant strain, the terrors of war and the terrors ofReconstruction had taken away all warmth and youth and softness. About the core of her being, ashell of hardness had formed and, little by little, layer by layer, the shell had thickened during theendless months.


But until this very day, two hopes had been left to sustain her. She had hoped that the war beingover, life would gradually resume its old face. She had hoped that Ashleys return would bringback some meaning into life. Now both hopes were gone. The sight of Jonas Wilkerson in the frontwalk of Tara had made her realize that for her, for the whole South, the war would never end. Thebitterest fighting, the most brutal retaliations, were just beginning. And Ashley was imprisonedforever by words which were stronger than any jail.


Peace had failed her and Ashley had failed her, both in the same day, and it was as if the lastcrevice in the shell had been sealed, the final layer hardened. She had become what GrandmaFontaine had counseled against, a woman who had seen the worst and so had nothing else to fear.


Not life nor Mother nor loss of love nor public opinion. Only hunger and her nightmare dream ofhunger could make her afraid.


A curious sense of lightness, of freedom, pervaded her now that she had finally hardened herheart against all that bound her to the old days and the old Scarlett. She had made her decision and,thank God, she wasnt afraid. She had nothing to lose and her mind was made up.


If she could only coax Rhett into marrying her, all would be perfect. But if she couldntwell,shed get the money just the same. For a brief moment she wondered with impersonal curiositywhat would be expected of a mistress. Would Rhett insist on keeping her in Atlanta as people saidhe kept the Watling woman? If he made her stay in Atlanta, hed have to pay wellpay enough tobalance what her absence from Tara would be worth. Scarlett was very ignorant of the hidden sideof mens lives and had no way of knowing just what the arrangement might involve. And shewondered if she would have a baby. That would be distinctly terrible.


I wont think of that now. Ill think of it later, and she pushed the unwelcome idea into theback of her mind lest it shake her resolution. Shed tell the family tonight she was going to Atlanta to borrow money, to try to mortgage the farm if necessary. That would be all they needed to knowuntil such an evil day when they might find out differently.


With the thought of action, her head went up and her shoulders went back. This affair was notgoing to be easy, she knew. Formerly, it had been Rhett who asked for her favors and she who heldthe power. Now she was the beggar and a beggar in no position to dictate terms.


But I wont go to him like a beggar. Ill go like a queen granting favors. Hell never know.


She walked to the long pier glass and looked at herself, her head held high. And she saw framedin the cracking gilt molding a stranger. It was as if she were really seeing herself for the first timein a year. She had glanced in the mirror every morning to see that her face was clean and her hairtidy but she had always been too pressed by other things to really see herself. But this stranger!


Surely this thin hollow-cheeked woman couldnt be Scarlett OHara! Scarlett OHara had a pretty,coquettish, high-spirited face. This face at which she stared was not pretty at all and had none ofthe charm she remembered so well. It was white and strained and the black brows above slantinggreen eyes swooped up startlingly against the white skin like frightened birds wings. There was ahard and hunted look about this face.


Im not pretty enough to get him! she thought and desperation came back to her. Im thinoh, Im terribly thin!


She patted her cheeks, felt frantically at her collar bones, feeling them stand out through herbasque. And her breasts were so small, almost as small as Melanies. Shed have to put ruffles inher bosom to make them look larger and she had always had contempt for girls who resorted tosuch subterfuges. Ruffles! That brought up another thought. Her clothes. She looked down at herdress, spreading its mended folds wide between her hands. Rhett liked women who were welldressed, fashionably dressed. She remembered with longing the flounced green dress she had wornwhen she first came out of mourning, the dress she wore with the green plumed bonnet he hadbrought her and she recalled the approving compliments he had paid her. She remembered, too,with hate sharpened by envy the red plaid dress, the red-topped boots with tassels and the pancakehat of Emmie Slattery. They were gaudy but they were new and fashionable and certainly theycaught the eye.


And, oh, how she wanted to catch the eye! Especially the eye of Rhett Butler! If heshould see her in her old clothes, hed know everything was wrong at Tara. And he must not know.


What a fool she had been to think she could go to Atlanta and have him for the asking, she withher scrawny neck and hungry cat eyes and raggedy dress! If she hadnt been able to pry a proposalfrom him at the height of her beauty, when she had her prettiest clothes, how could she expect toget one now when she was ugly and dressed tackily? If Miss Pittys story was true, he must havemore money than anyone in Atlanta and probably had his pick of all the pretty ladies, good andbad. Well, she thought grimly, Ive got something that most pretty ladies havent gotand thats amind thats made up. And if I had just one nice dressThere wasnt a nice dress in Tara or a dress which hadnt been turned twice and mended.


Thats that, she thought, disconsolately looking down at the floor. She saw Ellens moss-greenvelvet carpet, now worn and scuffed and torn and spotted from the numberless men who had sleptupon it, and the sight depressed her more, for it made her realize that Tara was just as ragged as she. The whole darkening room depressed her and, going to the window, she raised the sash,unlatched the shutters and let the last light of the wintry sunset into the room. She closed thewindow and leaned her head against the velvet curtains and looked out across the bleak pasturetoward the dark cedars of the burying ground.


The moss-green velvet curtains felt prickly and soft beneath her cheek and she rubbed her faceagainst them gratefully, like a cat And then suddenly she looked at them.


A minute later, she was dragging a heavy marble-topped table across the floor. Its rusty castorsscreeching in protest. She rolled the table under the window, gathered up her skirts, climbed on itand tiptoed to reach the heavy curtain pole. It was almost out of her reach and she jerked at it soimpatiently the nails came out of the wood, and the curtains, pole and all, fell to the floor with aclatter.


As if by magic, the door of the parlor opened and the wide black face of Mammy appeared,ardent curiosity and deepest suspicion evident in every wrinkle. She looked disapprovingly atScarlett, poised on the table top, her skirts above her knees, ready to leap to the floor. There was alook of excitement and triumph on her face which brought sudden distrust to Mammy.


Whut you up to wid Miss Ellens poteers? she demanded.


What are you up to listening outside doors? asked Scarlett, leaping nimbly to the floor andgathering up a length of the heavy dusty velvet.


Dat ain needer hyah no dar, countered Mammy, girding herself for combat You ain got nobizness wid Miss Ellens poteers, juckin de poles plum outer de wood, an drappin dem on deflo in de dust. Miss Ellen set gret sto by dem poteers an Ah ain tendin ter have you muss demup dat way.


Scarlett turned green eyes on Mammy, eyes which were feverishly gay, eyes which looked likethe bad little girl of the good old days Mammy sighed about.


Scoot up to the attic and get my box of dress patterns, Mammy, she cried, giving her a slightshove. Im going to have a new dress.


Mammy was torn between indignation at the very idea of her two hundred pounds scootinganywhere, much less to the attic, and the dawning of a horrid suspicion. Quickly she snatched thecurtain lengths from Scarlett, holding them against her monumental, sagging breasts as if theywere holy relics.


Not outer Miss Ellens poteers is you gwine have a new dress, ef dats whut you figgerin on.


Not wile Ah got breaf in mah body.


For a moment the expression Mammy was wont to describe to herself as bullheaded flittedover her young mistress face and then it passed into a smile, so difficult for Mammy to resist. Butit did not fool the old woman. She knew Miss Scarlett was employing that smile merely to getaround her and in this matter she was determined not to be gotten around.


Mammy, dont be mean. Im going to Atlanta to borrow some money and Ive got to have anew dress.


You doan need no new dress. Ain no other ladies got new dresses. Dey weahs dey ole ones an dey weahs dem proudfully. Ain no reason why Miss Ellens chile kain weah rags ef she wants ter,an eveybody respec her lak she wo silk.


The bullheaded expression began to creep back. Lordy, twus right funny how de older MissScarlett git de mo she look lak Mist Gerald and de less lak Miss Ellen!


Now, Mammy, you know Aunt Pitty wrote us that Miss Fanny Elsing is getting married thisSaturday, and of course Ill go to the wedding. And Ill need a new dress to wear.


De dress you got onll be jes as nice as Miss Fannys weddin dress. Miss Pitty done wrote datde Elsings mighty po.


But Ive got to have a new dress! Mammy, you dont know how we need money. The taxes


Yasm, Ah knows all bout de taxes but


You do?


Wellm, Gawd give me ears, din he, an ter hear wid? Specially wen Mist Will doan never tektrouble ter close de do.


Was there nothing Mammy did not overhear? Scarlett wondered how that ponderous body whichshook the floors could move with such savage stealth when its owner wished to eavesdrop.


Well, if you heard all that, I suppose you heard Jonas Wilkerson and that Emmie


Yasm, said Mammy with smoldering eyes.


Well, dont be a mule, Mammy. Dont you see Ive got to go to Atlanta and get money for thetaxes? Ive got to get some money. Ive got to do it! She hammered one small fist into the other.


Name of God, Mammy, theyll turn us all out into the road and then wherell we go? Are yougoing to argue with me about a little matter of Mothers curtains when that trash Emmie Slatterywho killed Mother is fixing to move into this house and sleep in the bed Mother slept in?


Mammy shifted from one foot to another like a restive elephant. She had a dim feeling that shewas being got around.


Nom, Ah ain wantin ter see trash in Miss Ellens house or us all in de road but She fixedScarlett with a suddenly accusing eye: Who is you fixin ter git money frum dat you needs a newdress?


That, said Scarlett, taken aback, is my own business.


Mammy looked at her piercingly, just as she had done when Scarlett was small and had triedunsuccessfully to palm off plausible excuses for misdeeds. She seemed to be reading her mind andScarlett dropped her eyes unwillingly, the first feeling of guilt at her intended conduct creepingover her.


So you needs a spang new pretty dress ter borry money wid. Dat doan lissen jes right ter me.


An you ain sayin whar de money ter come frum.


Im not saying anything, said Scarlett indignantly. Its my own business. Are you going togive me that curtain and help me make the dress?


Yasm, said Mammy softly, capitulating with a suddenness which aroused all the suspicion in Scarletts mind. Ah gwine hep you mek it an Ah specs we mout git a petticoat outer de satinlinin of de poteers an trim a par pantalets wid de lace cuttins.


She handed the velvet curtain back to Scarlett and a sly smile spread over her face.


Miss Melly gwine ter Lanta wid you, Miss Scarlett?


No, said Scarlett sharply, beginning to realize what was coming. Im going by myself.


Dats whut you thinks, said Mammy firmly, but Ah is gwine wid you an dat new dress. Yas,Mam, evey step of de way.


For an instant Scarlett envisaged her trip to Atlanta and her conversation with Rhett withMammy glowering chaperonage like a large black Cerberus in the background. She smiled againand put a hand on Mammys arm.


Mammy darling, youre sweet to want to go with me and help me, but how on earth would thefolks here get on without you? You know you just about run Tara.


Huh! said Mammy. Doan do no good ter sweet talk me, Miss Scarlett. Ah been knowin yousence Ah put de fust par of diapers on you. Ahs said Ahs gwine ter Lanta wid you an gwine Ahis. Miss Ellen be tuhnin in her grabe at you gwine up dar by yoseff wid dat town full up widYankees an free niggers an sech like.


But Ill be at Aunt Pittypats, Scarlett offered frantically.


Miss Pittypat a fine woman an she think she see eveything but she doan, said Mammy, andturning with the majestic air of having closed the interview, she went into the hall. The boardstrembled as she called:


Prissy, child! Fly up de stairs an fotch Miss Scarletts pattun box frum de attic an try an finede scissors without takin all night bout it.


This is a fine mess, thought Scarlett dejectedly. Id as soon have a bloodhound after me.


After supper had been cleared away, Scarlett and Mammy spread patterns on the dining-roomtable while Suellen and Carreen busily ripped satin linings from curtains and Melanie brushed thevelvet with a clean hairbrush to remove the dust. Gerald, Will and Ashley sat about the roomsmoking, smiling at the feminine tumult. A feeling of pleasurable excitement which seemed toemanate from Scarlett was on them all, an excitement they could not understand. There was colorin Scarletts face and a bright hard glitter in her eyes and she laughed a good deal. Her laughterpleased them all, for it had been months since they had heard her really laugh. Especially did itplease Gerald. His eyes were less vague than-usual as they followed her swishing figure about theroom and he patted her approvingly whenever she was within reach. The girls were as excited as ifpreparing for a ball and they ripped and cut and basted as if making a ball dress of their own.


Scarlett was going to Atlanta to borrow money or to mortgage Tara if necessary. But what was amortgage, after all? Scarlett said they could easily pay it off out of next years cotton and havemoney left over, and she said it with such finality they did not think to question. And when theyasked who was going to lend the money she said: Layovers catch meddlers, so archly they alllaughed and teased her about her millionaire friend.


It must be Captain Rhett Butler, said Melanie slyly and they exploded with mirth at thisabsurdity, knowing how Scarlett hated him and never failed to refer to him as that skunk, RhettButler.


But Scarlett did not laugh at this and Ashley, who had laughed, stopped abruptly as he sawMammy shoot a quick, guarded glance at Scarlett.


Suellen, moved to generosity by the party spirit of the occasion, produced her Irish-lace collar,somewhat worn but still pretty, and Carreen insisted that Scarlett wear her slippers to Atlanta, forthey were in better condition than any others at Tara. Melanie begged Mammy to leave her enoughvelvet scraps to recover the frame of her battered bonnet and brought shouts of laughter when shesaid the old rooster was going to part with his gorgeous bronze and green-black tail feathers unlesshe took to the swamp immediately.


Scarlett, watching the flying fingers, heard the laughter and looked at them all with concealedbitterness and contempt.


They havent an idea what is really happening to me or to themselves or to the South. They stillthink, in spite of everything, that nothing really dreadful can happen to any of them because theyare who they are, OHaras, Wilkeses, Hamiltons. Even the darkies feel that way. Oh, theyre allfools! Theyll never realize! Theyll go right on thinking and living as they always have, andnothing will change them. Melly can dress in rags and pick cotton and even help me murder a manbut it doesnt change her. Shes still the shy well-bred Mrs. Wilkes, the perfect lady! And Ashleycan see death and war and be wounded and lie in jail and come home to less than nothing and stillbe the same gentleman he was when he had all Twelve Oaks behind him. Will is different. Heknows how things really are but then Will never had anything much to lose.


And as for Suellen andCarreenthey think all this is just a temporary matter. They dont change to meet changed conditionsbecause they think itll all be over soon. They think God is going to work a miracle especiallyfor their benefit. But He wont. The only miracle thats going to be worked around here is the oneIm going to work on Rhett Butler. ... They wont change. Maybe they cant change. Im the onlyone whos changedand I wouldnt have changed if I could have helped it.


Mammy finally turned the men out of the dining room and closed the door, so the fitting couldbegin. Pork helped Gerald upstairs to bed and Ashley and Will were left alone in the lamplight inthe front hall. They were silent for a while and Will chewed his tobacco like a placid ruminantanimal. But his mild face was far from placid.


This goin to Atlanta, he said at last in a slow voice, I dont like it. Not one bit.


Ashley looked at Will quickly and then looked away, saying nothing but wondering if Will hadthe same awful suspicion which was haunting him. But that was impossible. Will didnt know whathad taken place in the orchard that afternoon and how it had driven Scarlett to desperation. Willcouldnt have noticed Mammys face when Rhett Butlers name was mentioned and, besides, Willdidnt know about Rhetts money or his foul reputation. At least, Ashley did not think he couldknow these things, but since coming back to Tara he had realized that Will, like Mammy, seemedto know things without being told, to sense them before they happened. There was somethingominous in the air, exactly what Ashley did nut know, but he was powerless to save Scarlett fromit. She had not met his eyes once that evening and the hard bright gaiety with which she had treated him was frightening. The suspicions which tore at him were too terrible to be put intowords.


He did not have the right to insult her by asking her if they were true. He clenched his fists.


He had no rights at all where she was concerned; this afternoon he had forfeited them all, forever.


He could not help her. No one could help her. But when he thought of Mammy and the look ofgrim determination she wore as she cut into the velvet curtains, he was cheered a little. Mammywould take care of Scarlett whether Scarlett wished it or not.


I have caused all this, he thought despairingly. I have driven her to this.


He remembered the way she had squared her shoulders when she turned away from him thatafternoon, remembered the stubborn lift of her head. His heart went out to her, torn with his ownhelplessness, wrenched with admiration. He knew she had no such word in her vocabulary asgallantry, knew she would have stared blankly if he had told her she was the most gallant soul hehad ever known. He knew she would not understand how many truly fine things he ascribed to herwhen he thought of her as gallant He knew that she took life as it came, opposed her tough-fiberedmind to whatever obstacles there might be, fought with a determination that would not recognize defeat, and kept on fighting even when she saw d(on) efeat was inevitable.


But, for four years, he had seen others who had refused to recognize defeat, men who rode gailyinto sure disaster because they were gallant And they had been defeated, just the same.


He thought as he stared at Will in the shadowy hall that he had never known such gallantry asthe gallantry of Scarlett OHara going forth to conquer the world in her mothers velvet curtainsand the tail feathers of a rooster.


----""----""------------"


----""------------"-


""--------


------------


------------