Chapter 63


THE FRONT DOOR was slightly ajar and she trotted, breathless, into the hall and paused for amoment under the rainbow prisms of the chandelier. For all its brightness the house was very still,not with the serene stillness of sleep but with a watchful, tired silence that was faintly ominous.


She saw at a glance that Rhett was not in the parlor or the library and her heart sank. Suppose heshould be outout with Belle or wherever it was he spent the many evenings when he did notappear at the supper table? She had not bargained on this.


She had started up the steps in search of him when she saw that the door of the dining room wasclosed. Her heart contracted a little with shame at the sight of that closed door, remembering themany nights of this last summer when Rhett had sat there alone, drinking until he was sodden andPork came to urge him to bed. That had been her fault but shed change it all. Everything was to bedifferent from now onbut, please God, dont let him be too drunk tonight. If hes too drunk hewont believe me and hell laugh at me and that will break my heart.


She quietly opened the dining-room door a crack and peered in. He was seated before the table,slumped in his chair, and a full decanter stood before him with the stopper in place, the glassunused. Thank God, he was sober! She pulled open the door, holding herself back from running tohim. But when he looked up at her, something in his gaze stopped her dead on the threshold, stilledthe words on her lips.


He looked at her steadily with dark eyes that were heavy with fatigue and there was no leapinglight in them. Though her hair was tumbling about her shoulders, her bosom heaving breathlesslyand her skirts mud splattered to the knees, his face did not change with surprise or question or hislips twist with mockery. He was sunken in his chair, his suit wrinkling untidily against histhickening waist, every line of him proclaiming the ruin of a fine body and the coarsening of astrong face. Drink and dissipation had done their work on the coin-clean profile and now it was nolonger the head of a young pagan prince on new-minted gold but a decadent, tired Caesar oncopper debased by long usage. He looked up at her as she stood there, hand on heart, lookedquietly, almost in a kindly way, that frightened her.


Come and sit down, he said. She is dead?


She nodded and advanced hesitantly toward him, uncertainty taking form in her mind at thisnew expression on his face. Without rising, he pushed back a chair with his foot and she sank intoit. She wished he had not spoken of Melanie so soon. She did not want to talk of her now, to re-livethe agony of the last hour. There was all the rest of her life in which to speak of Melanie. But itseemed to her now, driven by a fierce desire to cry: I love you, that there was only this night, thishour, in which to tell Rhett what was in her mind. But there was something in his face that stoppedher and she was suddenly ashamed to speak of love when Melanie was hardly cold.


Well, God rest her, he said heavily. She was the only completely kind person I ever knew.


Oh, Rhett! she cried miserably, for his words brought up too vividly all the kind thingsMelanie had ever done for her. Why didnt you come in with me? It was dreadfuland I neededyou so!


I couldnt have borne it, he said simply and for a moment he was silent. Then he spoke with an effort and said, softly: A very great lady.


His somber gaze went past her and in his eyes was the same look she had seen in the light of theflames the night Atlanta fell, when he told her he was going off with the retreating armythesurprise of a man who knows himself utterly, yet discovers in himself unexpected loyalties andemotions and feels a faint self-ridicule at the discovery.


His moody eyes went over her shoulder as though he saw Melanie silently passing through theroom to the door. In the look of farewell on his face there was no sorrow, no pain, only aspeculative wonder at himself, only a poignant stirring of emotions dead since boyhood, as he saidagain: A very great lady.


Scarlett shivered and the glow went from her heart, the fine warmth, the splendor which hadsent her home on winged feet. She half-grasped what was in Rhetts mind as he said farewell to theonly person in the world he respected and she was desolate again with a terrible sense of loss thatwas no longer personal. She could not wholly understand or analyze what he was feeling, but itseemed almost as if she too had been brushed by whispering skirts, touching her softly in a lastcaress. She was seeing through Rhetts eyes the passing, not of a woman but of a legendthegentle, self-effacing but steel-spined women on whom the South had builded its house in war andto whose proud and loving arms it had returned in defeatHis eyes came back to her and his voice changed. Now it was light and cool.


So shes dead. That makes it nice for you, doesnt it?


Oh, how can you say such things, she cried, stung, the quick tears coming to her eyes. Youknow how I loved her!


No, I cant say I did. Most unexpected and its to your credit, considering your passion forwhite trash, that you could appreciate her at last.


How can you talk so? Of course I appreciated her! You didnt. You didnt know her like I did!


It isnt in you to understand herhow good she was


Indeed? Perhaps not.


She thought of everybody except herselfwhy, her last words were about you.


There was a flash of genuine feeling in his eyes as he turned to her.


What did she say?


Oh, not now, Rhett.


Tell me.


His voice was cool but the hand he put on her wrist hurt. She did not want to tell, this was notthe way she had intended to lead up to the subject of her love but his hand was urgent.


She saidshe said Be kind to Captain Butler. He loves you so much.


He stared at her and dropped her wrist. His eyelids went down, leaving his face dark and blank.


Suddenly he rose and going to the window, he drew the curtains and looked out intently as if therewere something to see outside except blinding mist.


Did she say anything else? he questioned, not turning his head.


She asked me to take care of little Beau and I said I would, like he was my own boy.


What else?


She saidAshleyshe asked me to look after Ashley, too.


He was silent for a moment and then he laughed softly.


Its convenient to have the first wifes permission, isnt it?


What do you mean?


He turned and even in her confusion she was surprised that there was no mockery in his face.


Nor was there any more interest in it than in the face of a man watching the last act of a none-tooamusingcomedy.


I think my meanings plain enough. Miss Melly is dead. You certainly have all the evidenceyou want to divorce me and you havent enough reputation left for a divorce to hurt you. And youhavent any religion left, so the Church wont matter. ThenAshley and dreams come true withthe blessings of Miss Melly.


Divorce? she cried. No! No! Incoherent for a moment she leaped to her feet and running tohim caught his arm. Oh, youre all wrong! Terribly wrong. I dont want a divorce I Shestopped for she could find no other words.


He put his hand under her chin, quietly turned her face up to the light and looked for an intentmoment into her eyes. She looked up at him, her heart in her eyes, her lips quivering as she tried tospeak. But she could marshal no words because she was trying to find in his face some answeringemotions, some leaping light of hope, of joy. Surely he must know, now! But the smooth darkblankness which had baffled her so often was all that her frantic, searching eyes could find. Hedropped her chin and, turning, walked back to his chair and sprawled tiredly again, his chin on hisbreast, his eyes looking up at her from under black brows in an impersonal speculative way.


She followed him back to his chair, her hands twisting, and stood before him.


You are wrong, she began again, finding words. Rhett tonight, when I knew, I ran every stepof the way home to tell you. Oh, darling, I


You are tired, he said, still watching her. Youd better go to bed.


But I must tell you!


Scarlett, he said heavily, I dont want to hearanything.


But you dont know what Im going to say!


My pet, its written plainly on your face. Something, someone has made you realize that theunfortunate Mr. Wilkes is too large a mouthful of Dead Sea fruit for even you to chew. And thatsame something has suddenly set my charms before you in a new and attractive light, he sighedslightly. And its no use to talk about it.


She drew a sharp surprised breath. Of course, he had always read her easily. Heretofore she hadresented it but now, after the first shock at her own transparency, her heart rose with gladness and relief. He knew, he understood and her task was miraculously made easy. No use to talk about it!


Of course he was bitter at her long neglect, of course he was mistrustful of her sudden turnabout.


She would have to woo him with kindness, convince him with a rich outpouring of love, and whata pleasure it would be to do it!


Darling, Im going to tell you everything, she said, putting her hands on the arm of his chairand leaning down to him. Ive been so wrong, such a stupid fool


Scarlett, dont go on with this. Dont be humble before me. I cant bear it. Leave us somedignity, some reticence to remember out of our marriage. Spare us this last.


She straightened up abruptly. Spare us this last? What did he mean by this last? Last? Thiswas their first, their beginning.


But I will tell you, she began rapidly, as if fearing his hand upon her mouth, silencing her.


Oh, Rhett, I love you so, darling! I must have loved you for years and I was such a fool I didntknow it. Rhett, you must believe me!


He looked at her, standing before him, for a moment, a long look that went to the back of hermind. She saw there was belief in his eyes but little interest. Oh, was he going to be mean, at thisof all times? To torment her, pay her back in her own coin?


Oh, I believe you, he said at last But what of Ashley Wilkes?


Ashley! she said, and made an impatient gesture. II dont believe Ive cared anythingabout him for ages. It waswen, a sort of habit I hung onto from when I was a little girl. Rhett, Idnever even thought I cared about him if Id ever known what he was really like. Hes such ahelpless, poor-spirited creature, for all his prattle about truth and honor and


No, said Rhett. If you must see him as he really is, see him straight. Hes only a gentlemancaught in a world he doesnt belong in, trying to make a poor best of it by the rules of the worldthats gone.


Oh, Rhett, dont lets talk of him! What does he matter now? Arent you glad to know Imean, now that I


As his tired eyes met hers, she broke off in embarrassment, shy as a girl with her first beau. Ifhed only make it easier for her! If only he would hold out his arms, so she could crawl thankfullyinto his lap and lay her head on his chest. Her lips on his could tell him better than all herstumbling words. But as she looked at him, she realized that he was not holding her off just to bemean. He looked drained and as though nothing she had said was of any moment.


Glad? he said. Once I would have thanked God, fasting, to hear you say all this. But, now, itdoesnt matter.


Doesnt matter? What are you talking about? Of course, it matters! Rhett, you do care, dontyou? You must care. Melly said you did.


Well, she was right, as far as she knew. But, Scarlett, did it ever occur to you that even the mostdeathless love could wear out?


She looked at him speechless, her mouth a round O.


Mine wore out, he went on, against Ashley Wilkes and your insane obstinacy that makes youhold on like a bulldog to anything you think you want ... Mine wore out.


But love cant wear out!


Yours for Ashley did.


But I never really loved Ashley!


Then, you certainly gave a good imitation of itup till tonight. Scarlett, Im not upbraidingyou, accusing you, reproaching you. That time has passed. So spare me your defenses and yourexplanations. If you can manage to listen to me for a few minutes without interrupting, I canexplain what I mean. Though God knows, I see no need for explanations. The truths so plain.


She sat down, the harsh gas light falling on her white bewildered face. She looked into the eyesshe knew so welland knew so littlelistened to his quiet voice saying words which at firstmeant nothing. This was the first time he had ever talked to her in this manner, as one human beingto another, talked as other people talked, without flippancy, mockery or riddles.


Did it ever occur to you that I loved you as much as a man can love a woman? Loved you foryears before I finally got you? During the war Id go away and try to forget you, but I couldnt andI always had to come back. After the war I risked arrest, just to come back and find you. I cared somuch I believe I would have killed Frank Kennedy if he hadnt died when he did. I loved you but Icouldnt let you know it. Youre so brutal to those who love you, Scarlett. You take their love andhold it over their heads like a whip.


Out of it all only the fact that he loved her meant anything. At the faint echo of passion in hisvoice, pleasure and excitement crept back into her. She sat, hardly breathing, listening, waiting.


I knew you didnt love me when I married you. I knew about Ashley, you see. But, fool that Iwas, I thought I could make you care. Laugh, if you like, but I wanted to take care of you, to petyou, to give you everything you wanted. I wanted to marry you and protect you and give you a freerein in anything that would make you happyjust as I did Bonnie. Youd had such a struggle,Scarlett No one knew better than I what youd gone through and I wanted you to stop fighting andlet me fight for you. I wanted you to play, like a childfor you were a child, a brave, frightened,bullheaded child. I think you are still a child. No one but a child could be so headstrong and soinsensitive.


His voice was calm and tired but there was something in the quality of it that raised a ghost ofmemory in Scarlett. She had heard a voice like this once before and at some other crisis of her life.


Where had it been? The voice of a man facing himself and his world without feeling, withoutflinching, without hope.


Whywhyit had been Ashley in the wintry, windswept orchard at Tara, talking of life andshadow shows with a tired calmness that had more finality in its timbre than any desperatebitterness could have revealed. Even as Ashleys voice then had turned her cold with dread ofthings she could not understand, so now Rhetts voice made her heart sink. His voice, his manner,more than the content of his words, disturbed her, made her realize that her pleasurable excitementof a few moments ago had been untimely. Something was wrong, badly wrong. What it was shedid not know but she listened desperately, her eyes on his brown face, hoping to hear words that would dissipate her fears.


It was so obvious that we were meant for each other. So obvious that I was the only man ofyour acquaintance who could love you after knowing you as you really arehard and greedy andunscrupulous, like me. I loved you and I took the chance. I thought Ashley would fade out of yourmind. But, he shrugged, I tried everything I knew and nothing worked. And I loved you so,Scarlett. If you had only let me, I could have loved you as gently and as tenderly as ever a manloved a woman. But I couldnt let you know, for I knew youd think me weak and try to use mylove against me. And alwaysalways there was Ashley. It drove me crazy. I couldnt sit across thetable from you every night, knowing you wished Ashley was sitting there in my place. And Icouldnt hold you in my arms at night and know thatwell, it doesnt matter now. I wonder, now,why it hurt.


Thats what drove me to Belle. There is a certain swinish comfort in being with awoman who loves you utterly and respects you for being a fine gentlemaneven if she is anilliterate whore. It soothed my vanity. Youve never been very soothing, my dear.


Oh, Rhett ... she began, miserable at the very mention of Belles name, but he waved her tosilence and went on.


And then, that night when I carried you upstairsI thoughtI hopedI hoped so much I wasafraid to face you the next morning, for fear Id been mistaken and you didnt love me. I was soafraid youd laugh at me I went off and got drunk. And when I came back, I was shaking in myboots and if you had come even halfway to meet me, had given me some sign, I think Id havekissed your feet. But you didnt.


Oh, but Rhett, I did want you then but you were so nasty! I did want you! I thinkyes, thatmust have been when I first knew I cared about you. AshleyI never was happy about Ashleyafter that, but you were so nasty that I


Oh, well, he said. It seems weve been at cross purposes, doesnt it? But it doesnt matternow. Im only telling you, so you wont ever wonder about it all. When you were sick and it wasall my fault, I stood outside your door, hoping youd call for me, but you didnt, and then I knewwhat a fool Id been and that it was all over.


He stopped and looked through her and beyond her, even as Ashley had often done, seeingsomething she could not see. And she could only stare speechless at his brooding face.


But then, there was Bonnie and I saw that everything wasnt over, after all. I liked to think thatBonnie was you, a little girl again, before the war and poverty had done things to you. She was solike you, so willful, so brave and gay and full of high spirits, and I could pet her and spoil herjust as I wanted to pet you. But she wasnt like youshe loved me. It was a blessing that I couldtake the love you didnt want and give it to her ... When she went, she took everything.


Suddenly she was sorry for him, sorry with a completeness that wiped out her own grief and herfear of what his words might mean. It was the first time in her life she had been sorry for anyonewithout feeling contemptuous as well, because it was the first time she had ever approachedunderstanding any other human being. And she could understand his shrewd caginess, so like herown, his obstinate pride that kept him from admitting his love for fear of a rebuff.


Ah, darling, she said coming forward, hoping he would put out his arms and draw her to his knees. Darling, Im so sorry but Ill make it all up to you! We can be so happy, now that we knowthe truth andRhettlook at me, Rhett! Therethere can be other babiesnot like Bonnie but


Thank you, no, said Rhett, as if he were refusing a piece of bread. Ill not risk my heart athird time.


Rhett, dont say such things! Oh, what can I say to make you understand? Ive told you howsorry I am


My darling, youre such a child. You think that by saying, Im sorry, all the errors and hurts ofyears past can be remedied, obliterated from the mind, all the poison drawn from old wounds. ...


Take my handkerchief, Scarlett. Never, at any crisis of your life, have I known you to have ahandkerchief.


She took the handkerchief, blew her nose and sat down. It was obvious that he was not going totake her in his arms. It was beginning to be obvious that all his talk about loving her meantnothing. It was a tale of a time long past and he was looking at it as though it had never happenedto him. And that was frightening. He looked at her in an almost kindly way, speculation in his eyes.


How old are you, my dear? You never would tell me.


Twenty-eight, she answered dully, muffled in the handkerchief.


Thats not a vast age. Its a young age to have gained the whole world and lost your own soul,isnt it? Dont look frightened. Im not referring to hell fire to come for your affair with Ashley.


Im merely speaking metaphorically. Ever since Ive known you, youve wanted two things.


Ashley and to be rich enough to tell the world to go to hell. Well, you are rich enough and youvespoken sharply to the world and youve got Ashley, if you want him. But all that doesnt seem tobe enough now.


She was frightened but not at the thought of hell fire. She was thinking: But Rhett is my souland Im losing him. And if I lose him, nothing else matters! No, not friends or money ororanything. If only I had him I wouldnt even mind being poor again. No, I wouldnt mind beingcold again or even hungry. But he cant mean Oh, he cant!


She wiped her eyes and said desperately:


Rhett, if you once loved me so much, there must be something left for me.


Out of it all I find only two things that remain and they are the two things you hate the mostpity and an odd feeling of kindness.


Pity! Kindness! Oh, my God, she thought despairingly. Anything hut pity and kindness.


Whenever she felt these two emotions for anyone, they went hand in hand with contempt Was hecontemptuous of her too? Anything would be preferable to that. Even the cynical coolness of thewar days, the drunken madness that drove him the night he carried her up the stairs, his hardfingers bruising her body, or the barbed drawling words that she now realized had covered a bitterlove. Anything except this impersonal kindness that was written so plainly in his face.


Thenthen you mean Ive ruined it allthat you dont love me any more?


Thats right.


But, she said stubbornly, like a child who still feels that to state a desire is to gain that desire,but I love you!


Thats your misfortune.


She looked up quickly to see if there was a jeer behind those words but there was none. He wassimply stating a fact. But it was a fact she still would not believecould not believe. She looked athim with slanting eyes that burned with a desperate obstinacy and the sudden hard line of jaw thatsprang out through her soft cheek was Geralds jaw.


Dont be a fool, Rhett! I can make


He flung up a hand in mock horror and his black brows went up in the old sardonic crescents.


Dont look so determined, Scarlett! You frighten me. I see you are contemplating the transfer ofyour tempestuous affections from Ashley to me and I fear for my liberty and my peace of mind.


No, Scarlett, I will not be pursued as the luckless Ashley was pursued. Besides, I am going away.


Her jaw trembled before she clenched her teeth to steady it. Go away? No, anything but that!


How could life go on without him? Everyone had gone from her, everyone who mattered exceptRhett. He couldnt go. But how could she stop him? She was powerless against his cool mind, hisdisinterested words.


I am going away. I intended to tell you when you came home from Marietta.


You are deserting me?


Dont be the neglected, dramatic wife, Scarlett. The role isnt becoming. I take it, then, you donot want a divorce or even a separation? Well, then, Ill come back often enough to keep gossipdown.


Damn gossip! she said fiercely. Its you I want. Take me with you!


No, he said, and there was finality in his voice. For a moment she was on the verge of anoutburst of childish wild tears. She could have thrown herself on the floor, cursed and screamedand drummed her heels. But some remnant of pride, of common sense stiffened her. She thought, ifI did, hed only laugh, or just look at me. I mustnt bawl; I mustnt beg. I mustnt do anything torisk his contempt. He must respect me eveneven if he doesnt love me.


She lifted her chin and managed to ask quietly:


Where will you go?


There was a faint gleam of admiration in his eyes as he answered.


Perhaps to Englandor to Paris. Perhaps to Charleston to try to make peace with my people.


But you hate them! Ive heard you laugh at them so often and


He shrugged.


I still laughbut Ive reached the end of roaming, Scarlett Im forty-fivethe age when a manbegins to value some of the things hes thrown away so lightly in youth, the clannishness of families, honor and security, roots that go deep Oh, not Im not recanting, Im not regrettinganything Ive ever done. Ive had a hell of a good timesuch a hell of a good time that its begunto pall and now I want something different. No, I never intend to change more than my spots. But Iwant the outer semblance of the things I used to know, the utter boredom of respectabilityotherpeoples respectability, my pet, not my ownthe calm dignity life can have when its lived bygentle folks, the genial grace of days that are gone. When I lived those days I didnt realize theslow charm of them


Again Scarlett was back in the windy orchard of Tara and there was the same look in Rhettseyes that had been in Ashleys eyes that day. Ashleys words were as clear in her ears as though heand not Rhett were speaking. Fragments of words came back to her and she quoted parrot-like: Aglamour to ita perfection, a symmetry like Grecian art.


Rhett said sharply: Why did you say that? Thats what I meant.


It was something thatthat Ashley said once, about the old days.


He shrugged and the light went out of his eyes.


Always Ashley, he said and was silent for a moment.


Scarlett, when you are forty-five, perhaps you will know what Im talking about and thenperhaps you, too, will be tired of imitation gentry and shoddy manners and cheap emotions. But Idoubt it. I think youll always be more attracted by glister than by gold. Anyway, I cant wait thatlong to see. And I have no desire to wait. It just doesnt interest me. Im going to hunt in old townsand old countries where some of the old times must still linger. Im that sentimental. Atlantas tooraw for me, too new.


Stop, she said suddenly. She had hardly heard anything he had said. Certainly her mind hadnot taken it in. But she knew she could no longer endure with any fortitude the sound of his voicewhen there was no love in itHe paused and looked at her quizzically.


Well, you get my meaning, dont you? he questioned, rising to his feet.


She threw out her hands to him, palms up, in the age-old gesture of appeal and her heart, again,was in her face.


No, she cried. All I know is that you do not love me and you are going away! Oh, mydarling, if you go, what shall I do?


For a moment he hesitated as if debating whether a kind lie were kinder in the long run than thetruth. Then he shrugged.


Scarlett, I was never one to patiently pick up broken fragments and glue them together and tellmyself that the mended whole was as good as new. What is broken is brokenand Id ratherremember it as it was at its best than mend it and see the broken places as long as I lived. Perhaps,if I were younger he sighed. But Im too old to believe in such sentimentalities as clean slatesand starting all over. Im too old to shoulder the burden of constant lies that go with living in politedisillusionment. I couldnt live with you and lie to you and I certainly couldnt lie to myself. I canteven lie to you now. I wish I could care what you do or where you go, but I cant.


He drew a short breath and said lightly but softly:


My dear, I dont give a damn.


She silently watched him go up the stairs, feeling that she would strangle at the pain in herthroat. With the sound of his feet dying away in the upper hall was dying the last thing in the worldthat mattered. She knew now that there was no appeal of emotion or reason which would turn thatcool brain from its verdict. She knew now that he had meant every word he said, lightly thoughsome of them had been spoken. She knew because she sensed in him something strong, unyielding,implacableall the qualities she had looked for in Ashley and never found.


She had never understood either of the men she had loved and so she had lost them both. Now,she had a fumbling knowledge that, had she ever understood Ashley, she would never have lovedhim; had she ever understood Rhett, she would never have lost him. She wondered forlornly if shehad ever really understood anyone in the world.


There was a merciful dullness in her mind now, a dullness that she knew from long experiencewould soon give way to sharp pain, even as severed tissues, shocked by the surgeons knife, have abrief instant of insensibility before their agony begins.


I wont think of it now, she thought grimly, summoning up her old charm. Ill go crazy if Ithink about losing him now. Ill think of it tomorrow.


But, cried her heart, casting aside the charm and beginning to ache, I cant let him go! Theremust be some way!


I wont think of it now, she said again, aloud, trying to push her misery to the back of hermind, trying to find some bulwark against the rising tide of pain. Illwhy, Ill go home to Taratomorrow, and her spirits lifted faintly.


She had gone back to Tara once in fear and defeat and she had emerged from its sheltering wallsstrong and armed for victory. What she had done once, somehowplease God, she could do again!


How, she did not know. She did not want to think of that now. All she wanted was a breathingspace in which to hurt, a quiet place to lick her wounds, a haven in which to plan her campaign.


She thought of Tara and it was as if a gentle cool hand were stealing over her heart. She could seethe white house gleaming welcome to her through the reddening autumn leaves, feel the quiet hushof the country twilight coming down over her like a benediction, feel the dews falling on the acresof green bushes starred with fleecy white, see the raw color of the red earth and the dismal darkbeauty of the pines on the rolling hills.


She felt vaguely comforted, strengthened by the picture, and some of her hurt and frantic regretwas pushed from the top of her mind. She stood for a moment remembering small things, theavenue of dark cedars leading to Tara, the banks of cape jessamine bushes, vivid green against thewhite walls, the fluttering white curtains. And Mammy would be there. Suddenly she wantedMammy desperately, as she had wanted her when she was a little girl, wanted the broad bosom onwhich to lay her head, the gnarled black hand on her hair. Mammy, the last link with the old days.


With the spirit of her people who would not know defeat, even when it stared them in the face,she raised her chin. She could get Rhett back. She knew she could. There had never been a manshe couldnt get, once she set her mind upon him.


Ill think of it all tomorrow, at Tara. I can stand it then. Tomorrow, Ill think of some way to gethim back. After all, tomorrow is another day.


""""--------""----"


"--------"


""----"""""""----"""


"""------------"""


----""--------""


------------"------------"""""


--------"----


""--------------------"""


--------""----"""----


--------""----"


----------------------------"


----""----