Chapter 45


THAT NIGHT when Frank deposited her and Aunt Pitty and the children at Melanies and rodeoff down the street with Ashley, Scarlett could have burst with rage and hurt. How could he go offto a political meeting on this of all nights in the world? A political meeting! And on the same nightwhen she had been attacked, when anything might have happened to her! It was unfeeling andselfish of him. But then, he had taken the whole affair with maddening calm, ever since Sam hadcarried her sobbing into the house, her basque gaping to the waist. He hadnt clawed his beardeven once when she cried out her story. He had just questioned gently: Sugar, are you hurtorjust scared?


Wrath mingling with her tears she had been unable to answer and Sam had volunteered that shewas just scared.


Ah got dar fo dey done mon tar her dress.


Youre a good boy, Sam, and I wont forget what youve done. If theres anything I can do foryou


Yassah, you kin sen me ter Tara, quick as you kin. De Yankees is affer me.


Frank had listened to this statement calmly too, and had asked no questions. He had looked verymuch as he did the night Tony came beating on their door, as though this was an exclusivelymasculine affair and one to be handled with a minimum of words and emotions.


You go get in the buggy. Ill have Peter drive you as far as Rough and Ready tonight and youcan hide in the woods till morning and then catch the train to Jonesboro. Itll be safer. ... Now,Sugar, stop crying. Its all over now and you arent really hurt. Miss Pitty, could I have yoursmelling salts? And Mammy, fetch Miss Scarlett a glass of wine.


Scarlett had burst into renewed tears, this time tears of rage. She wanted comforting,indignation, threats of vengeance. She would even have preferred him storming at her, saying thatthis was just what he had warned her would happenanything rather than have him take it all socasually and treat her danger as a matter of small moment. He was nice and gentle, of course, butin an absent way as if he had something far more important on his mind.


And that important thing had turned out to be a small political meeting!


She could hardly believe her ears when he told her to change her dress and get ready for him toescort her over to Melanies for the evening. He must know how harrowing her experience hadbeen, must know she did not want to spend an evening at Melanies when her tired body andjangled nerves cried out for the warm relaxation of bed and blanketswith a hot brick to make hertoes tingle and a hot toddy to soothe her fears. If he really loved her, nothing could have forced him from her side on this of all nights. He would have stayed home and held her hand and told herover and over that he would have died if anything had happened to her. And when he came hometonight and she had him alone, she would certainly tell him so.


Melanies small parlor looked as serene as it usually did on nights when Frank and Ashley wereaway and the women gathered together to sew. The room was warm and cheerful in the firelight.


The lamp on the table shed a quiet yellow glow on the four smooth heads bent to their needlework.


Four skirts billowed modestly, eight small feet were daintily placed on low hassocks. The quietbreathing of Wade, Ella and Beau came through the open door of the nursery. Archie sat on a stoolby the hearth, his back against the fireplace, his cheek distended with tobacco, whittlingindustriously on a bit of wood. The contrast between the dirty, hairy old man and the four neat,fastidious ladies was as great as though he were a grizzled, vicious old watchdog and they foursmall kittens.


Melanies soft voice, tinged with indignation, went on and on as she told of the recent outburstof temperament on the part of the Lady Harpists. Unable to agree with the Gentlemens Glee Clubas to the program for their next recital, the ladies had waited on Melanie that afternoon andannounced their intention of withdrawing completely from the Musical Circle. It had taken all ofMelanies diplomacy to persuade them to defer their decision.


Scarlett, overwrought, could have screamed: Oh, damn the Lady Harpists! She wanted to talkabout her dreadful experience. She was bursting to relate it in detail, so she could ease her ownfright by frightening the others. She wanted to tell how brave she had been, just to assure herselfby the sound of her own words that she had, indeed, been brave. But every time she brought up thesubject, Melanie deftly steered the conversation into other and innocuous channels. This irritatedScarlett almost beyond endurance. They were as mean as Frank.


How could they be so calm and placid when she had just escaped so terrible a fate? Theywerent even displaying common courtesy in denying her the relief of talking about it.


The events of the afternoon had shaken her more than she cared to admit, even to herself. Everytime she thought of that malignant black face peering at her from the shadows of the twilight forestroad, she fell to trembling. When she thought of the black hand at her bosom and what would havehappened if Big Sam had not appeared, she bent her head lower and squeezed her eyes tightly shut.


The longer she sat silent in the peaceful room, trying to sew, listening to Melanies voice, thetighter her nerves stretched. She felt that at any moment she would actually hear them break withthe same pinging sound a banjo string makes when it snaps.


Archies whittling annoyed her and she frowned at him. Suddenly it seemed odd that he shouldbe sitting there occupying himself with a piece of wood. Usually he lay flat on the sofa, during theevenings when he was on guard, and slept and snored so violently that his long beard leaped intothe air with each rumbling breath. It was odder still that neither Melanie nor India hinted to himthat he should spread a paper on the floor to catch his litter of shavings. He had already made aperfect mess on the hearth rug but they did not seem to have noticed it.


While she watched him, Archie turned suddenly toward the fire and spat a stream of tobaccojuice on it with such vehemence that India, Melanie and Pitty leaped as though a bomb hadexploded.


Need you expectorate so loudly? cried India in a voice that cracked with nervous annoyance.


Scarlett looked at her in surprise for India was always so self-contained.


Archie gave her look for look.


I reckon I do, he answered coldly and spat again. Melanie gave a little frowning glance atIndia.


I was always so glad dear Papa didnt chew, began Pitty, and Melanie, her frown creasingdeeper, swung on her and spoke sharper words than Scarlett had ever heard her speak.


Oh, do hush, Auntie! Youre so tactless.


Oh, dear! Pitty dropped her sewing in her lap and her mouth pressed up in hurt. I declare, Idont know What ails you all tonight You and India are just as jumpy and cross as two old sticks.


No one answered her. Melanie did not even apologize for her crossness but went back to hersewing with small violence.


Youre taking stitches an inch long, declared Pitty with some satisfaction. Youll have to takeevery one of them out. Whats the matter with you?


But Melanie still did not answer.


Was there anything the matter with them, Scarlett wondered? Had she been too absorbed withher own fears to notice? Yes, despite Melanies attempts to make the evening appear like any oneof fifty they had all spent together, there was a difference due to their alarm and shock at what hadhappened that afternoon. Scarlett stole glances at her companions and intercepted a look from India.


It discomforted her because it was a long, measuring glance that carried in its cold depthssomething stronger than hate, something more insulting than contempt.


As though she thought I was to blame for what happened, Scarlett thought indignantly.


India turned from her to Archie and, all annoyance at him gone from her face, gave him a lookof veiled anxious inquiry. But he did not meet her eyes. He did however look at Scarlett, staring ather in the same cold hard way India had done.


Silence fell dully in the room as Melanie did not take up the conversation again and, in thesilence, Scarlett heard the rising wind outside. It suddenly began to be a most unpleasant evening.


Now she began to feel the tension in the air and she wondered if it had been present all during theeveningand she too upset to notice it. About Archies face there was an alert waiting look and histufted, hairy old ears seemed pricked up like a lynxs. There was a severely repressed uneasinessabout Melanie and India that made them raise their heads from their sewing at each sound ofhooves in the road, at each groan of bare branches under the wailing wind, at each scuffing soundof dry leaves tumbling across the lawn. They started at each soft snap of burning logs on the hearthas if they were stealthy footsteps.


Something was wrong and Scarlett wondered what it was. Something was afoot and she did notknow about it. A glance at Aunt Pittys plump guileless face, screwed up in a pout, told her that theold lady was as ignorant as she. But Archie and Melanie and India knew. In the silence she couldalmost feel the thoughts of India and Melanie whirling as madly as squirrels in a cage. They knewsomething, were waiting for something, despite their efforts to make things appear as usual. And their inner unease communicated itself to Scarlett, making her more nervous than before. Handlingher needle awkwardly, she jabbed it into her thumb and with a little scream of pain and annoyancethat made them all jump, she squeezed it until a bright red drop appeared.


Im just too nervous to sew, she declared, throwing her mending to the floor. Im nervousenough to scream. I want to go home and go to bed. And Frank knew it and he oughtnt to havegone out. He talks, talks, talks about protecting women against darkies and Carpetbaggers andwhen the time comes for him to do some protecting, where is he? At home, taking care of me? No,indeed, hes gallivanting around with a lot of other men who dont do anything but talk and


Her snapping eyes came to rest on Indias face and she paused. India was breathing fast and herpale lashless eyes were fastened on Scarletts face with a deadly coldness.


If it wont pain you too much, India, she broke off sarcastically, Id be much obliged if youdtell me why youve been staring at me all evening. Has my face turned green or something?


It wont pain me to tell you. Ill do it with pleasure, said India and her eyes glittered. I hate tosee you underrate a fine man like Mr. Kennedy when, if you knew


India! said Melanie warningly, her hands clenching on her sewing.


I think I know my husband better than you do, said Scarlett, the prospect of a quarrel, the firstopen quarrel she had ever had with India, making her spirits rise and her nervousness depart.


Melanies eyes caught Indias and reluctantly India closed her lips. But almost instantly she spokeagain and her voice was cold with hate.


You make me sick, Scarlett OHara, talking about being protected! You dont care about beingprotected! If you did youd never have exposed yourself as you have done all these months,prissing yourself about this town, showing yourself off to strange men, hoping theyll admire you!


What happened to you this afternoon was just what you deserved and if there was any justiceyoud have gotten worse.


Oh, India, hush! cried Melanie.


Let her talk, cried Scarlett Im enjoying it. I always knew she hated me and she was toomuch of a hypocrite to admit it. If she thought anyone would admire her, shed be walking thestreets naked from dawn till dark.


India was on her feet her lean body quivering with insult.


I do hate you, she said in a clear but trembling voice. But it hasnt been hypocrisy thats keptquiet Its something you cant understand, not possessing anyany common courtesy,com(me) mon good breeding. Its the realization that if all of us dont hang together and submerge ourown small hates, we cant expect to beat the Yankees. But youyouyouve done all you couldto lower the prestige of decent peopleworking and bringing shame on a good husband, givingYankees and riffraff the right to laugh at us and make insulting remarks about our lack of gentility.


Yankees dont know that you arent one of us and have never been. Yankees havent sense enoughto know that you havent any gentility. And when youve ridden about the woods exposingyourself to attack, youve exposed every well-behaved woman in town to attack by puttingtemptation in the ways of darkies and mean white trash. And youve put our men folks lives in danger because theyve got to


My God, India! cried Melanie and even in her wrath, Scarlett was stunned to hear Melanietake the Lords name in vain. You must hush! She doesnt know and sheyou must hush! Youpromised


Oh, girls! pleaded Miss Pittypat, her lips trembling.


What dont I know? Scarlett was on her feet, furious, facing the coldly blazing India and theimploring Melanie.


Guinea hens, said Archie suddenly and his voice was contemptuous. Before anyone couldrebuke him, his grizzled head went up sharply and he rose swiftly. Somebody comin up the walk.


Taint Mr. Wilkes neither. Cease your cackle.


There was male authority in his voice and the women stood suddenly silent anger fading swiftlyfrom their faces as he stumped across the room to the door.


Whos thar? he questioned before the caller even knocked.


Captain Butler. Let me in.


Melanie was across the floor so swiftly that her hoops swayed up violently, revealing herpantalets to the knees, and before Archie could put his hand on the knob she flung the door open.


Rhett Butler stood in the doorway, his black slouch hat low over his eyes, the wild wind whippinghis cape about him in snapping folds. For once his good manners had deserted him. He neithertook off his hat nor spoke to the others in the room. He had eyes for no one but Melanie and hespoke abruptly without greeting.


Where have they gone? Tell me quickly. Its life or death.


Scarlett and Pitty, startled and bewildered, looked at each other in wonderment and, like a leanold cat, India streaked across the room to Melanies side.


Dont tell him anything, she cried swiftly. Hes a spy, a Scalawag!


Rhett did not even favor her with a glance.


Quickly, Mrs. Wilkes! There may still be time.


Melanie seemed in a paralysis of terror and only stared into his face.


What on earth began Scarlett.


Shet yore mouth, directed Archie briefly. You too, Miss Melly. Git the hell out of here, youdamned Scalawag.


No, Archie, no! cried Melanie and she put a shaking hand on Rhetts arm as though to protecthim from Archie. What has happened? How didhow did you know?


On Rhetts dark face impatience fought with courtesy.


Good God, Mrs. Wilkes, theyve all been under suspicion since the beginningonly theyvebeen too cleveruntil tonight! How do I know? I was playing poker tonight with two drunkenYankee captains and they let it out. The Yankees knew thered be trouble tonight and theyve prepared for it. The fools have walked into a trap.


For a moment it was as though Melanie swayed under the impact of a heavy blow and Rhettsarm went around her waist to steady her.


Dont tell him! Hes trying to trap you! cried India, glaring at Rhett. Didnt you hear him sayhed been with Yankee officers tonight?


Still Rhett did not look at her. His eyes were bent insistently on Melanies white face.


Tell me. Where did they go? Have they a meeting place?


Despite her fear and incomprehension, Scarlett thought she had never seen a blanker, moreexpressionless face than Rhetts but evidently Melanie saw something else, something that madeher give her trust. She straightened her small body away from the steadying arm and said quietlybut with a voice that shook:


Out the Decatur road near Shantytown. They meet in the cellar of the old Sullivan plantationthe one thats half-burned.


Thank you. Ill ride fast. When the Yankees come here, none of you know anything.


He was gone so swiftly, his black cape melting into the night, that they could hardly realize hehad been there at all until they heard the spattering of gravel and the mad pounding of a horsegoing off at full gallop.


The Yankees coming here? cried Pitty and, her small feet turning under her, she collapsed onthe sofa, too frightened for tears.


Whats it all about? What did he mean? If you dont tell me Ill go crazy! Scarlett laid handson Melanie and shook her violently as if by force she could shake an answer from her.


Mean? It means youve probably been the cause of Ashleys and Mr. Kennedys death! Inspite of the agony of fear there was a note of triumph in Indias voice. Stop shaking Melly. Shesgoing to faint.


No, Im not, whispered Melanie, clutching the back of a chair.


My God, my God! I dont understand! Kill Ashley? Please, somebody tell me


Archies voice, like a rusty hinge, cut through Scarletts words.


Set down, he ordered briefly. Pick up yore sewin. Sew like nothin had happened. For all weknow, the Yankees might have been spyin on this house since sundown. Set down, I say, and sew.


Trembling they obeyed, even Pitty picking up a sock and holding it in shaking fingers while hereyes, wide as a frightened childs went around the circle for an explanation.


Where is Ashley? What has happened to him, Melly? cried Scarlett.


Wheres your husband? Arent you interested in him? Indias pale eyes blazed with insanemalice as she crumpled and straightened the torn towel she had been mending.


India, please! Melanie had mastered her voice but her white, shaken face and tortured eyesshowed the strain under which she was laboring. Scarlett, perhaps we should have told you but butyou had been through so much this afternoon that wethat Frank didnt thinkand youwere always so outspoken against the Klan


The Klan


At first, Scarlett spoke the word as if she had never heard it before and had no comprehension ofits meaning and then:


The Klan! she almost screamed it. Ashley isnt in the Klan! Frank cant be! Oh, he promisedme!


Of course, Mr. Kennedy is in the Klan and Ashley, too, and all the men we know, cried India.


They are men, arent they? And white men and Southerners. You should have been proud of himinstead of making him sneak out as though it were something shameful and


You all have known all along and I didnt


We were afraid it would upset you, said Melanie sorrowfully.


Then thats where they go when theyre supposed to be at the political meetings? Oh, hepromised me! Now, the Yankees will come and take my mills and the store and put him in jailoh,what did Rhett Butler mean?


Indias eyes met Melanies in wild fear. Scarlett rose, flinging her sewing down.


If you dont tell me, Im going downtown and find out. Ill ask everybody I see until I find


Set, said Archie, fixing her with his eye. Ill tell you. Because you went gallivantin thisafternoon and got yore-self into trouble through yore own fault, Mr. Wilkes and Mr. Kennedy andthe other men are out tonight to kill that thar nigger and that thar white man, if they can catchthem, and wipe out that whole Shantytown settlement. And if what that Scalawag said is true, theYankees suspected sumpin or got wind somehow and theyve sont out troops to lay for them. Andour men have walked into a trap. And if what Butler said warnt true, then hes a spy and he isgoin to turn them up to the Yankees and theyll git kilt just the same. And if he does turn them up,then Ill kill him, if its the last deed of m life. And if they aint kilt, then theyll all have to lightout of here for Texas and lay low and maybe never come back.


Its all yore fault and thars bloodon yore hands.


Anger wiped out the fear from Melanies face as she saw comprehension come slowly acrossScarletts face and then horror follow swiftly. She rose and put her hand on Scarletts shoulder.


Another such word and you go out of this house, Archie, she said sternly. Its not her faultShe only diddid what she felt she had to do. And our men did what they felt they had to do.


People must do what they must do. We dont all think alike or act alike and its wrong toto judgeothers by ourselves. How can you and India say such cruel things when her husband as well asmine may bemay be


Hark! interrupted Archie softly. Set, Mam. Thars horses.


Melanie sank into a chair, picked up one of Ashleys shirts and, bowing her head over it,unconsciously began to tear the frills into small ribbons.


The sound of hooves grew louder as horses trotted up to the house. There was the jangling of bits and the strain of leather and the sound of voices. As the hooves stopped in front of the house,one voice rose above the others in a command and the listeners heard feet going through the sideyard toward the back porch. They felt that a thousand inimical eyes looked at them through theunshaded front window and the four women, with fear in their hearts, bent their heads and pliedtheir needles. Scarletts heart screamed in her breast: Ive killed Ashley! Ive killed him! And inthat wild moment she did not even think that she might have killed Frank too. She had no room inher mind for any picture save that of Ashley, lying at the feet of Yankee cavalrymen, his fair hairdappled with blood.


As the harsh rapid knocking sounded at the door, she looked at Melanie and saw come over thesmall, strained face a new expression, an expression as blank as she had just seen on Rhett Butlersface, the bland blank look of a poker player bluffing a game with only two deuces.


Archie, open the door, she said quietly.


Slipping his knife into his boot top and loosening the pistol in his trouser band, Archie stumpedover to the door and flung it open. Pitty gave a little squeak, like a mouse who feels the trap snapdown, as she saw massed in the doorway, a Yankee captain and a squad of bluecoats. But theothers said nothing. Scarlett saw with the faintest feeling of relief that she knew this officer. Hewas Captain Tom Jaffery, one of Rhetts friends. She had sold him lumber to build his house. Sheknew him to be a gentleman. Perhaps, as he was a gentleman, he wouldnt drag them away toprison. He recognized her instantly and, taking off his hat, bowed, somewhat embarrassed.


Good evening, Mrs. Kennedy. And which of you ladies is Mrs. Wilkes?


I am Mrs. Wilkes, answered Melanie, rising and for all her smallness, dignity flowed from her.


And to what do I owe this intrusion?


The eyes of the captain flickered quickly about the room, resting for an instant on each face,passing quickly from their faces to the table and the hat rack as though looking for signs of maleoccupancy.


I should like to speak to Mr. Wilkes and Mr. Kennedy, if you please.


They are not here, said Melanie, a chill in her soft voice.


Are you sure?


Dont you question Miz Wilkes word, said Archie, his beard bristling.


I beg your pardon, Mrs. Wilkes. I meant no disrespect. If you give me your word, I will notsearch the house.


You have my word. But search if you like. They are at a meeting downtown at Mr. Kennedysstore.


They are not at the store. There was no meeting tonight, answered the captain grimly. Wewill wait outside until they return.


He bowed briefly and went out, closing the door behind him. Those in the house heard a sharporder, muffled by the wind: Surround the house. A man at each window and door. There was atramping of feet. Scarlett checked a start of terror as she dimly saw bearded faces peering in the windows at them. Melanie sat down and with a hand that did not tremble reached for a book on thetable. It was a ragged copy of Les Miserables, that book which caught the fancy of the Confederatesoldiers. They had read it by campfire light and took some grim pleasure in calling it LeesMiserables. She opened it at the middle and began to read in a clear monotonous voice.


Sew, commanded Archie in a hoarse whisper and the three women, nerved by Melanies coolvoice, picked up their sewing and bowed their heads.


How long Melanie read beneath that circle of watching eyes, Scarlett never knew but it seemedhours. She did not even hear a word that Melanie read. Now she was beginning to think of Frankas well as Ashley. So this was the explanation of his apparent calm this evening! He had promisedher he would have nothing to do with the Klan. Oh, this was just the kind of trouble she had fearedwould come upon them! All the work of this last year would go for nothing. All her struggles andfears and labors in rain and cold had been wasted. And who would have thought that spiritless oldFrank would get himself mixed up in the hot-headed doings of the Klan? Even at this minute, hemight be dead. And if he wasnt dead and the Yankees caught him, hed be hanged. And Ashley,too!


Her nails dug, into her palms until four bright-red crescents showed. How could Melanie read onand on so calmly when Ashley was in danger of being hanged? When he might be dead? Butsomething in the cool soft voice reading the sorrows of Jean Valjean steadied her, kept her fromleaping to her feet and screaming.


Her mind fled back to the night Tony Fontaine had come to them, hunted, exhausted, withoutmoney. If he had not reached their house and received money and a fresh horse, he would havebeen hanged long since. If Frank and Ashley were not dead at this very minute, they were inTonys position, only worse. With the house surrounded by soldiers they couldnt come home andget money and clothes without being captured. And probably every house up and down the streethad a similar guard of Yankees, so they could not apply to friends for aid. Even now they might beriding wildly through the night, bound for Texas.


But Rhettperhaps Rhett had reached them in time. Rhett always had plenty of cash in hispocket. Perhaps he would lend them enough to see them through. But that was queer. Why shouldRhett bother himself about Ashleys safety? Certainly he disliked him, certainly he professed acontempt for him. Then why But his riddle was swallowed up in a renewed fear for the safety ofAshley and Frank.


Oh, its all my fault! she wailed to herself. India and Archie spoke the truth. Its all my fault.


But I never thought either of them was foolish enough to join the Klan! And I never thoughtanything would really happen to me! But I couldnt have done otherwise. Melly spoke the truth.


People have to do what they have to do. And I had to keep the mills going! I had to have money!


And now Ill probably lose it all and somehow its all my fault!


After a long time Melanies voice faltered, trailed off and was silent. She turned her head towardthe window and stared as though no Yankee soldier stared back from behind the glass. The othersraised their heads, caught by her listening pose, and they too listened.


There was a sound of horses feet and of singing, deadened by the closed windows and doors, borne away by the wind but still recognizable. It was the most hated and hateful of all songs, thesong about Shermans men Marching through Georgia and Rhett Butler was singing it.


Hardly had he finished the first lines when two other voices, drunken voices, assailed him,enraged foolish voices that stumbled over words and blurred them together. There was a quickcommand from Captain Jaffery on the front porch and the rapid tramp of feet. But even beforethese sounds arose, the ladies looked at one another stunned. For the drunken voices expostulatingwith Rhett were those of Ashley and Hugh Elsing.


Voices rose louder on the front walk, Captain Jafferys curt and questioning, Hughs shrill withfoolish laughter, Rhetts deep and reckless and Ashleys queer, unreal, shouting: What the hell!


What the hell!


That cant be Ashley! thought Scarlett wildly. He never gets drunk! And Rhettwhy, whenRhetts drunk he gets quieter and quieternever loud like that!


Melanie rose and, with her, Archie rose. They heard the captains sharp voice: These two menare under arrest. And Archies hand closed over his pistol butt.


No, whispered Melanie firmly. No. Leave it to me.


There was in her face the same look Scarlett had seen that day at Tara when Melanie had stoodat the top of the steps looking down at the dead Yankee, her weak wrist weighed down by theheavy sabera gentle and timid soul nerved by circumstances to the caution and fury of a tigress.


She threw the front door open.


Bring him in, Captain Butler, she called in a clear tone that bit with venom. I suppose youvegotten him intoxicated again. Bring him in.


From the dark windy walk, the Yankee captain spoke: Im sorry, Mrs. Wilkes, but your husbandand Mr. Elsing are under arrest.


Arrest? For what? For drunkenness? If everyone in Atlanta was arrested for drunkenness, thewhole Yankee garrison would be in jail continually. Well, bring him in, Captain Butlerthat is, ifyou can walk yourself.


Scarletts mind was not working quickly and for a brief moment nothing made sense. She knewneither Rhett nor Ashley was drunk and she knew Melanie knew they were not drunk. Yet here wasMelanie, usually so gentle and refined, screaming like a shrew and in front of Yankees too, thatboth of them were too drunk to walk.


There was a short mumbled argument, punctuated with curses, and uncertain feet ascended thestairs. In the doorway appeared Ashley, white faced, his head lolling, his bright hair tousled, hislong body wrapped from neck to knees in Rhetts black cape. Hugh Elsing and Rhett, none toosteady on their feet, supported him on either side and it was obvious he would have fallen to thefloor but for their aid. Behind them came the Yankee captain, his face a study of mingled suspicionand amusement. He stood in the open doorway with his men peering curiously over his shouldersand the cold wind swept the house.


Scarlett, frightened, puzzled, glanced at Melanie and back to the sagging Ashley and then half-comprehension came to her. She started to cry out: But he cant be drunk! and bit back the words. She realized she was witnessing a play, a desperate play on which lives hinged. She knewshe was not part of it nor was Aunt Pitty but the others were and they were tossing cues to oneanother like actors in an oft-rehearsed drama. She understood only half but she understood enoughto keep silent.


Put him in the chair, cried Melanie indignantly. And you, Captain Butler, leave this houseimmediately! How dare you show your face here after getting him in this condition again!


The two men eased Ashley into a rocker and Rhett, swaying, caught hold of the back of the chairto steady himself and addressed the captain with pain in his voice.


Thats fine thanks I get, isnt it? For keeping the police from getting him and bringing himhome and him yelling and trying to claw me!


And you, Hugh Elsing, Im ashamed of you! What will your poor mother say? Drunk and outwith aa Yankee-loving Scalawag like Captain Butler! And, oh, Mr. Wilkes, how could you dosuch a thing?


Melly, I aint so very drunk, mumbled Ashley, and with the words fell forward and lay facedown on the table, his head buried in his arms.


Archie, take him to his room and put him to bedas usual, ordered Melanie. Aunt Pitty,please run and fix the bed and oo-oh, she suddenly burst into tears. Oh, how could he? After hepromised!


Archie already had his arm under Ashleys shoulder and Pitty, frightened and uncertain, was onher feet when the captain interposed.


Dont touch him. Hes under arrest. Sergeant!


As the sergeant stepped into the room, his rifle at trail, Rhett, evidently trying to steady himself,put a hand on the captains arm and, with difficulty, focused his eyes.


Tom, what you arresting him for? He aint so very drunk. Ive seen him drunker.


Drunk be damned, cried the captain. He can lie in the gutter for all I care. Im no policeman.


He and Mr. Elsing are under arrest for complicity in a Klan raid at Shantytown tonight. A niggerand a white man were killed. Mr. Wilkes was the ringleader in it.


Tonight? Rhett began to laugh. He laughed so hard that he sat down on the sofa and put hishead in his hands. Not tonight, Tom, he said when he could speak. These two have been withme tonightever since eight oclock when they were supposed to be at the meeting.


With you, Rhett? But A frown came over the captains forehead and he looked uncertainlyat the snoring Ashley and his weeping wife. Butwhere were you?


I dont like to say, and Rhett shot a look of drunken cunning at Melanie.


Youd better say!


Les go out on the porch and Ill tell you where we were.


Youll tell me now.


Hate to say it in front of ladies. If you ladiesll step out of the room


I wont go, cried Melanie, dabbing angrily at her eyes with her handkerchief. I have a right toknow. Where was my husband?


At Belle Watlings sporting house, said Rhett, looking abashed. He was there and Hugh andFrank Kennedy and Dr. Meade andand a whole lot of them. Had a party. Big party. Champagne.


Atat Belle Watlings?


Melanies voice rose until it cracked with such pain that all eyes turned frightenedly to her. Herhand went clutching at her bosom and, before Archie could catch her, she had fainted. Then ahubbub ensued, Archie picking her up, India running to the kitchen for water, Pitty and Scarlettfanning her and slapping her wrists, while Hugh Elsing shouted over and over: Now youve doneit! Now youve done it!


Now itll be all over town, said Rhett savagely. I hope youre satisfied, Tom. There wont bea wife in Atlanta wholl speak to her husband tomorrow.


Rhett, I had no idea Though the chill wind was blowing through the open door on his back,the captain was perspiring. Look here! You take an oath they were aterat Belles?


Hell, yes, growled Rhett Go ask Belle herself if you dont believe me. Now, let me carryMrs. Wilkes to her room. Give her to me, Archie. Yes, I can carry her. Miss Pitty, go ahead with alamp.


He took Melanies limp body from Archies arms with ease.


You get Mr. Wilkes to bed, Archie. I dont want to ever lay eyes or hands on him again afterthis night.


Pittys hand trembled so that the lamp was a menace to the safety of the house but she held itand trotted ahead toward the dark bedroom. Archie, with a grunt, got an arm under Ashley andraised him.


ButIve got to arrest these men!


Rhett turned in the dim hallway.


Arrest them in the morning then. They cant run away in this conditionand I never knewbefore that it was illegal to get drunk in a sporting house. Good God, Tom, there are fifty witnessesto prove they were at Belles.


There are always fifty witnesses to prove a Southerner was somewhere he wasnt, said thecaptain morosely. You come with me, Mr. Elsing. Ill parole Mr. Wilkes on the word of


I am Mr. Wilkes sister. I will answer for his appearance, said India coldly. Now, will youplease go? Youve caused enough trouble for one night.


I regret it exceedingly. The captain bowed awkwardly. I only hope they can prove theirpresence at theerMissMrs. Watlings house. Will you tell your brother that he must appearbefore the provost marshal tomorrow morning for questioning?


India bowed coldly and, putting her hand upon the door knob, intimated silently that his speedy retirement would be welcome. The captain and the sergeant backed out, Hugh Elsing with them,and she slammed the door behind them. Without even looking at Scarlett, she went swiftly to eachwindow and drew down the shade. Scarlett, her knees shaking, caught hold of the chair in whichAshley had been sitting to steady herself. Looking down at it, she saw that there was a dark moistspot, larger than her hand, on the cushion in the back of the chair. Puzzled, her hand went over itand, to her horror, a sticky red wetness appeared on her palm.


India, she whispered, India, Ashleyshes hurt.


You fool! Did you think he was really drunk? India snapped down the last shade and startedon flying feet for the bedroom, with Scarlett close behind her, her heart in her throat. Rhetts bigbody barred the doorway but, past his shoulder, Scarlett saw Ashley lying white and still on thebed. Melanie, strangely quick for one so recently in a faint, was rapidly cutting off his blood-soaked shirt with embroidery scissors. Archie held the lamp low over the bed to give light and oneof his gnarled fingers was on Ashleys wrist.


Is he dead? cried both girls together.


No, just fainted from loss of blood. Its through his shoulder, said Rhett.


Why did you bring him here, you fool? cried India, Let me get to him! Let me pass! Why didyou bring him here to be arrested?


He was too weak to travel. There was nowhere else to bring him, Miss Wilkes. Besidesdoyou want him to be an exile like Tony Fontaine? Do you want a dozen of your neighbors to live inTexas under assumed names for the rest of their lives? Theres a chance that we may get them alloff if Belle


Let me pass!


No, Miss Wilkes. Theres work for you. You must go for a doctor Not Dr. Meade. Hesimplicated in this and is probably explaining to the Yankees at this very minute. Get some otherdoctor. Are you afraid to go out alone at night?


No, said India, her pale eyes glittering. Im not afraid. She caught up Melanies hooded capewhich was hanging on a book in the hall. Ill go for old Dr. Dean. The excitement went out ofher voice as, with an effort, she forced calmness. Im sorry I called you a spy and a fool. I did notunderstand. Im deeply grateful for what youve done for Ashleybut I despise you just thesame.


I appreciate franknessand I thank you for it. Rhett bowed and his lip curled down in anamused smile. Now, go quickly and by back ways and when you return do not come in this houseif you see signs of soldiers about.


India shot one more quick anguished look at Ashley, and, wrapping her cape about her, ranlightly down the hall to the back door and let herself out quietly into the night.


Scarlett, straining her eyes past Rhett, felt her heart beat again as she saw Ashleys eyes open.


Melanie snatched a folded towel from the washstand rack and pressed it against his streamingshoulder and he smiled up weakly, reassuringly into her face. Scarlett felt Rhetts hard penetratingeyes upon her, knew that her heart was plain upon her face, but she did not care. Ashley was bleeding, perhaps dying and she who loved him had torn that hole through his shoulder. Shewanted to run to the bed, sink down beside it and clasp him to her but her knees trembled so thatshe could not enter the room. Hand at her mouth, she stared while Melanie packed a fresh towelagainst his shoulder, pressing it hard as though she could force back the blood into his body. Butthe towel reddened as though by magic.


How could a man bleed so much and still live? But, thank God, there was no bubble of blood athis lipsoh, those frothy red bubbles, forerunners of death that she knew so well from thedreadful day of the battle at Peachtree Creek when the wounded had died on Aunt Pittys lawn withbloody mouths.


Brace up, said Rhett, and there was a hard, faintly jeering note in his voice. He wont die.


Now, go take the lamp and hold it for Mrs. Wilkes. I need Archie to run errands.


Archie looked across the lamp at Rhett.


I aint takin no orders from you, he said briefly, shifting his wad of tobacco to the othercheek.


You do what he says, said Melanie sternly, and do it quickly. Do everything Captain Butlersays. Scarlett, take the lamp.


Scarlett went forward and took the lamp, holding it in both hands to keep from dropping it.


Ashleys eyes had closed again. His bare chest heaved up slowly and sank quickly and the redstream seeped from between Melanies small frantic fingers. Dimly she heard Archie stump acrossthe room to Rhett and heard Rhetts low rapid words. Her mind was so fixed upon Ashley that ofthe first half-whispered words of Rhett, she only heard: Take my horse ... tied outside ... ride likehell.


Archie mumbled some question and Scarlett heard Rhett reply: The old Sullivan plantation.


Youll find the robes pushed up the biggest chimney. Burn them.


Um, grunted Archie.


And theres twomen in the cellar. Pack them over the horse as best you can and take them tothat vacant lot behind Bellesthe one between her house and the railroad tracks. Be careful. Ifanyone sees you, youll hang as well as the rest of us. Put them in that lot and put pistols near themin their hands. Heretake mine.


Scarlett, looking across the room, saw Rhett reach under his coat tails and produce two revolverswhich Archie took and shoved into his waist band.


Fire one shot from each. Its got to appear like a plain case of shooting. You understand?


Archie nodded as if he understood perfectly and an unwilling gleam of respect shone in his coldeye. But understanding was far from Scarlett. The last half-hour had been so nightmarish that shefelt nothing would ever be plain and clear again. However, Rhett seemed in perfect command ofthe bewildering situation and that was a small comfort.


Archie turned to go and then swung about and his one eye went questioningly to Rhetts face.


Yes.


Archie grunted and spat on the floor.


Hell to pay, he said as he stumped down the hall to the back door.


Something in the last low interchange of words made a new fear and suspicion rise up inScarletts breast like a chill ever-swelling bubble. When that bubble brokeWheres Frank? she cried.


Rhett came swiftly across the room to the bed, his big body swinging as lightly and noiselesslyas a cats.


All in good time, he said and smiled briefly. Steady that lamp, Scarlett. You dont want toburn Mr. Wilkes up. Miss Melly


Melanie looked up like a good little soldier awaiting a command and so tense was the situation itdid not occur to her that for the first time Rhett was calling her familiarly by the name which onlyfamily and old friends used.


I beg your pardon, I mean, Mrs. Wilkes. ...


Oh, Captain Butler, do not ask my pardon! I should feel honored if you called me Melly


without the Miss! I feel as though you were mymy brother oror my cousin. How kind you areand how clever! How can I ever thank you enough?


Thank you, said Rhett and for a moment he looked almost embarrassed. I should neverpresume so far, but Miss Melly, and his voice was apologetic, Im sorry I had to say that Mr.


Wilkes was in Belle Watlings house. Im sorry to have involved him and the others in such aBut I had to think fast when I rode away from here and that was the only plan that occurred to me.


I knew my word would be accepted because I have so many friends among the Yankee officers.


They do me the dubious honor of thinking me almost one of them because they know myshallwe call it my unpopularity?among my townsmen. And you see, I was playing poker in Bellesbar earlier in the evening. There are a dozen Yankee soldiers who can testify to that. And Belle andher girls will gladly lie themselves black in the face and say Mr. Wilkes and the others wereupstairs all evening. And the Yankees will believe them. Yankees are queer that way. It wont occurto them that women oftheir profession are capable of intense loyalty or patriotism. The Yankeeswouldnt take the word of a single nice Atlanta lady as to the whereabouts of the men who weresupposed to be at the meeting tonight but they will take the word offancy ladies. And I think thatbetween the word of honor of a Scalawag and a dozen fancy ladies, we may have a chance ofgetting the men off.


There was a sardonic grin on his face at the last words but it faded as Melanie turned up to him aface that blazed with gratitude.


Captain Butler, you are so smart! I wouldnt have cared if youd said they were in hell itselftonight, if it saves them! For I know and every one else who matters knows that my husband wasnever in a dreadful place like that!


Well began Rhett awkwardly, as a matter of fact, he was at Belles tonight.


Melanie drew herself up coldly.


You can never make me believe such a lie!


Please, Miss Melly! Let me explain! When I got out to the old Sullivan place tonight, I foundMr. Wilkes wounded and with him were Hugh Elsing and Dr. Meade and old man Merriwether


Not the old gentleman! cried Scarlett.


Men are never too old to be fools. And your Uncle Henry


Oh, mercy! cried Aunt Pitty.


The others had scattered after the brush with the troops and the crowd that stuck together hadcome to the Sullivan place to hide their robes in the chimney and to see how badly Mr. Wilkes washurt. But for his wound, theyd be headed for Texas by nowall of thembut he couldnt ride farand they wouldnt leave him. It was necessary to prove that they had been somewhere instead ofwhere they had been, and so I took them by back ways to Belle Watlings.


OhI see. I do beg your pardon for my rudeness, Captain Butler. I see now it was necessary totake them there but Oh, Captain Butler, people must have seen you going in!


No one saw us. We went in through a private back entrance that opens on the railroad tracks.


Its always dark and locked.


Then how?


I have a key, said Rhett laconically, and his eyes met Melanies evenly.


As the full impact of the meaning smote her, Melanie became so embarrassed that she fumbledwith the bandage until it slid off the wound entirely.


I did not mean to pry she said in a muffled voice, her white face reddening, as she hastilypressed the towel back into place.


I regret having to tell a lady such a thing.


Then its true! thought Scarlett with an odd pang. Then he does live with that dreadful Watlingcreature! He does own her house!


I saw Belle and explained to her. We gave her a list of the men who were out tonight and sheand her girls will testify that they were all in her house tonight. Then to make our exit moreconspicuous, she called the two desperadoes who keep order at her place and had us draggeddownstairs, fighting, and through the barroom and thrown out into the street as brawling drunkswho were disturbing the place.


He grinned reminiscently. Dr. Meade did not make a very convincing drunk. It hurt his dignityto even be in such a place. But your Uncle Henry and old man Merriwether were excellent. Thestage lost two great actors when they did not take up the drama. They seemed to enjoy the affair.


Im afraid your Uncle Henry has a black eye due to Mr. Merriwethers zeal for his part. He


The back door swung open and India entered, followed by old Dr. Dean, his long white hairtumbled, his worn leather bag bulging under his cape. He nodded briefly but without words tothose present and quickly lifted the bandage from Ashleys shoulder.


Too high for the lung, he said. If it hasnt splintered his collar bone its not so serious. Get meplenty of towels, ladies, and cotton if you have it, and some brandy.


Rhett took the lamp from Scarlett and set it on the table as Melanie and India sped about,obeying the doctors orders.


You cant do anything here. Come into the parlor by the fire. He took her arm and propelledher from the room. There was a gentleness foreign to him in both hand and voice. Youve had arotten day, havent you?


She allowed herself to be led into the front room and though she stood on the hearth rug in frontof the fire she began to shiver. The bubble of suspicion in her breast was swelling larger now. Itwas more than a suspicion. It was almost a certainty and a terrible certainty. She looked up intoRhetts immobile face and for a moment she could not speak. Then:


Was Frank atBelle Watlings?


No.


Rhetts voice was blunt.


Archies carrying him to the vacant lot near Belles. Hes dead. Shot through the head.