Chapter 48


SHE DID HAVE FUN, more fun than she had had since the spring before the war. New Orleanswas such a strange, glamorous place and Scarlett enjoyed it with the headlong pleasure of apardoned life prisoner. The Carpetbaggers were looting the town, many honest folk were drivenfrom their homes and did not know where to look for their next meal, and a negro sat in thelieutenant governors chair. But the New Orleans Rhett showed her was the gayest place she hadever seen. The people she met seemed to have all the money they wanted and no cares at all. Rhettintroduced her to dozens of women, pretty women in bright gowns, women who had soft handsthat showed no signs of hard work, women who laughed at everything and never talked of stupidserious things or hard times. And the men she methow thrilling they were!


And how differentfrom Atlanta menand how they fought to dance with her, and paid her the most extravagantcompliments as though she were a young belle.


These men had the same hard reckless look Rhett wore. Their eyes were always alert, like menwho have lived too long with danger to be ever quite careless. They seemed to have no pasts orfutures, and they politely discouraged Scarlett when, to make conversation, she asked what orwhere they were before they came to New Orleans. That, in itself, was strange, for in Atlanta everyrespectable newcomer hastened to present his credentials, to tell proudly of his home and family, totrace the tortuous mazes of relationship that stretched over the entire South.


But these men were a taciturn lot, picking their words carefully. Sometimes when Rhett wasalone with them and Scarlett in the next room, she heard laughter and caught fragments ofconversation that meant nothing to her, scraps of words, puzzling namesCuba and Nassau in theblockade days, the gold rush and claim jumping, gun running and filibustering, Nicaragua andWilliam Walker and how he died against a wall at Truxillo. Once her sudden entrance abruptlyterminated a conversation about what had happened to the members of Quantrills band of guerillas,and she caught the names of Frank and Jesse James.


But they were all well mannered, beautifully tailored, and they evidently admired her, so itmattered little to Scarlett that they chose to live utterly in the present. What really mattered wasthat they were Rhetts friends and had large houses and fine carriages, and they took her and Rhettdriving, invited them to suppers, gave parties in their honor. And Scarlett liked them very well.


Rhett was amused when she told him so.


I thought you would, he said and laughed.


Why not? her suspicions aroused as always by his laughter.


Theyre all second-raters, black sheep, rascals. Theyre all adventurers or Carpetbag aristocrats.


They all made their money speculating in food like your loving husband or out of dubiousgovernment contracts or in shady ways that wont bear investigation.


I dont believe it Youre teasing. Theyre the nicest people ...


The nicest people in town are starving, said Rhett. And living politely in hovels, and I doubtif Id be received in those hovels. You see, my dear, I was engaged in some of my nefariousschemes here during the war and these people have devilish long memories! Scarlett, you are aconstant joy to me. You unerringly manage to pick the wrong people and the wrong things.


But they are your friends!


Oh, but I like rascals. My early youth was spent as a gambler on a river boat and I canunderstand people like that. But Im not blind to what they are. Whereas you he laughed againyou have no instinct about people, no discrimination between the cheap and the great. Sometimes,I think that the only great ladies youve ever associated with were your mother and MissMelly and neither seems to have made any impression on you.


Melly! Why shes as plain as an old shoe and her clothes always look tacky and she never hastwo words to say for herself!


Spare me your jealousy, Madam. Beauty doesnt make a lady, nor clothes a great lady!


Oh, dont they! Just you wait, Rhett Butler, and Ill show you. Now that Iveweve gotmoney, Im going to be the greatest lady you ever saw!


I shall wait with interest, he said.


More exciting than the people she met were the frocks Rhett bought her, superintending thechoice of colors, materials and designs himself. Hoops were out now, and the new styles werecharming with the skirts pulled back from the front and draped over bustles, and on the bustleswere wreaths of Sowers and bows and cascades of lace. She thought of the modest hoops of thewar years and she felt a little embarrassed at these new skirts which undeniably outlined herabdomen. And the darling little bonnets that were not really bonnets at all, but flat little affairsworn over one eye and laden with fruits and flowers, dancing plumes and fluttering ribbons! (Ifonly Rhett had not been so silly and burned the false curls she bought to augment her knot ofIndian-straight hair that peeked from the rear of these little hats!) And the delicate convent-madeunderwear! How lovely it was and how many sets she had!


Chemises and nightgowns andpetticoats of the finest linen trimmed with dainty embroidery and infinitesimal tucks. And the satinslippers Rhett bought her! They had heels three inches high and huge glittering paste buckles onthem. And silk stockings, a dozen pairs and not a one had cotton tops! What riches!


She recklessly bought gifts for the family. A furry St. Bernard puppy for Wade, who had alwayslonged for one, a Persian kitten for Beau, a coral bracelet for little Ella, a heavy necklace withmoonstone pendants for Aunt Pitty, a complete set of Shakespeare for Melanie and Ashley, anelaborate livery for Uncle Peter, including a high silk coachmans hat with a brush upon it, dresslengths for Dilcey and Cookie, expensive gifts for everyone at Tara.


But what have you bought for Mammy? questioned Rhett, looking over the pile of gifts spreadout on the bed in their hotel room, and removing the puppy and kitten to the dressing room.


Not a thing. She was hateful. Why should I bring her a present when she called us mules?


Why should you so resent hearing the truth, my pet? You must bring Mammy a present Itwould break her heart if you didntand hearts like hers are too valuable to be broken.


I wont take her a thing. She doesnt deserve it.


Then Ill buy her one. I remember my mammy always said that when she went to Heaven shewanted a taffeta petticoat so stiff that it would stand by itself and so rustly that the Lord God wouldthink it was made of angels wings. Ill buy Mammy some red taffeta and have an elegant petticoatmade.


She wont take it from you. Shed die rather than wear it.


I dont doubt it But Ill make the gesture just the same.


The shops of New Orleans were so rich and exciting and shopping with Rhett was an adventure.


Dining with him was an adventure too, and one more thrilling than shopping, for he knew what toorder and how it should be cooked. The wines and liqueurs and champagnes of New Orleans werenew and exhilarating to her, acquainted with only homemade blackberry and scuppernong vintagesand Aunt Pittys swoon brandy; but oh, the food Rhett ordered! Best of all things in New Orleanswas the food. Remembering the bitter hungry days at Tara and her more recent penury, Scarlett feltthat she could never eat enough of these rich dishes. Gumboes and shrimp Creole, doves in wineand oysters in crumbly patties full of creamy sauce, mushrooms and sweetbreads and turkey livers,fish baked cunningly in oiled paper and limes. Her appetite never dulled, for whenever sheremembered the everlasting goobers and dried peas and sweet potatoes at Tara, she felt an urge togorge herself anew of Creole dishes.


You eat as though each meal were your last, said Rhett. Dont scrape the plate, Scarlett. Imsure theres more in the kitchen. You have only to ask the waiter. If you dont stop being such aglutton, youll be as fat as the Cuban ladies and then I shall divorce you.


But she only put out her tongue at him and ordered another pastry, thick with chocolate andstuffed with meringue.


What fun it was to be able to spend as much money as you liked and not count pennies and feelthat you should save them to pay taxes or buy mules. What fun to be with people who were gayand rich and not genteelly poor like Atlanta people. What fun to wear rustling brocade dresses thatshowed your waist and all your neck and arms and more than a little of your breast and know thatmen were admiring you. And what fun to eat all you wanted without having censorious people sayyou werent ladylike. And what fun to drink all the champagne you pleased. The first time shedrank too much, she was embarrassed when she awoke the next-morning with a splitting headacheand an awful memory of singing Bonnie Blue Flag all the way back to the hotel, through thestreets of New Orleans, in an open carriage.


She had never seen a lady even tipsy, and the onlydrunken woman she had ever seen had been that Watling creature on the day when Atlanta fell. Shehardly knew how to face Rhett, so great was her humiliation, but the affair seemed only to amusehim. Everything she did seemed to amuse him, as though she were a gamboling kitten.


It was exciting to go out with him for he was so handsome. Somehow she had never given hislooks a thought before, and in Atlanta everyone had been too preoccupied with his shortcomings ever to talk about his appearance. But here in New Orleans she could see how the eyes of otherwomen followed him and how they fluttered when he bent over their hands. The realization thatother women were attracted by her husband, and perhaps envied her, made her suddenly proud tobe seen by his side.


Why, were a handsome people, thought Scarlett with pleasure.


Yes, as Rhett had prophesied, marriage could be a lot of fun. Not only was it fun but she waslearning many things. That was odd in itself, because Scarlett had thought life could teach her nomore. Now she felt like a child, every day on the brink of a new discovery.


First, she learned that marriage with Rhett was a far different matter from marriage with eitherCharles or Frank. They had respected her and been afraid of her temper. They had begged forfavors and if it pleased her, she had bestowed them. Rhett did not fear her and, she often thought,did not respect her very much either. What he wanted to do, he did, and if she did not like it, helaughed at her. She did not love him but he was undoubtedly an exciting person to live with. Themost exciting thing about him was that even in his outbursts of passion which were flavoredsometimes with cruelty, sometimes with irritating amusement, he seemed always to be holdinghimself under restraint, always riding his emotions with a curb bit.


I guess thats because he isnt really in love with me, she thought and was content enoughwith the state of affairs. I should hate for him to ever turn completely loose in any way. But stillthe thought of the possibility teased her curiosity in an exciting way.


Living with Rhett, she learned many new things about him, and she had thought she knew himso well. She learned that his voice could be as silky as a cats fur one moment and crisp andcrackling with oaths the next. He could tell, with apparent sincerity and approval, stories ofcourage and honor and virtue and love in the odd places he had been, and follow them with ribaldstories of coldest cynicism. She knew no man should tell such stories to his wife but they wereentertaining and they appealed to something coarse and earthy in her. He could be an ardent,almost a tender, lover for a brief while, and almost immediately a mocking devil who ripped the lidfrom her gunpowder temper, fired it and enjoyed the explosion. She learned that his complimentswere always two edged and his tenderest expressions open to suspicion. In fact, in those two weeksin New Orleans, she learned everything about him except what he really was.


Some mornings he dismissed the maid and brought her the breakfast tray himself and fed her asthough she were a child, took the hairbrush from her hand and brushed her long dark hair until itsnapped and crackled. Yet other mornings she was torn rudely out of deep slumber when hesnatched all the bed covers from her and tickled her bare feet. Sometimes he listened withdignified interest to details of her businesses, nodding approval at her sagacity, and at other timeshe called her somewhat dubious tradings scavenging, highway robbery and extortion. He took herto plays and annoyed her by whispering that God probably didnt approve of such amusements,and to churches and, sotto voice, retailed funny obscenities and then reproved her for laughing. Heencouraged her to speak her mind, to be flippant and daring. She picked up from him the gift ofstinging words and sardonic phrases and learned to relish using them for the power they gave herover other people.


But she did not possess his sense of humor which tempered his malice, nor hissmile that jeered at himself even while he was jeering others.


He made her play and she had almost forgotten how. Life had been so serious and so bitter. Heknew how to play and swept her along with him. But he never played like a boy; he was a man andno matter what he did, she could never forget it. She could not look down on him from the heightsof womanly superiority, smiling as women have always smiled at the antics of men who are boysat heart.


This annoyed her a little, whenever she thought of it. It would be pleasant to feel superior toRhett. All the other men she had known she could dismiss with a half-contemptuous What achild! Her father, the Tarleton twins with their love of teasing and their elaborate practical jokes,the hairy little Fontaines with their childish rages, Charles, Frank, all the men who had paid courtto her during the wareveryone, in fact except Ashley. Only Ashley and Rhett eluded herunderstanding and her control for they were both adults, and the elements of boyishness werelacking in them.


She did not understand Rhett, nor did she trouble to understand him, though there were thingsabout him which occasionally puzzled her. There was the way he looked at her sometimes, whenhe thought she was unaware. Turning quickly she frequently caught him watching her, an alerteager, waiting look in his eyes.


Why do you look at me like that? she once asked irritably. Like a cat at a mouse hole!


But his face had changed swiftly and he only laughed. Soon she forgot it and did not puzzle herhead about it any more, or about anything concerning Rhett. He was too unpredictable to botherabout and life was very pleasantexcept when she thought of Ashley.


Rhett kept her too busy to think of Ashley often. Ashley was hardly ever in her thoughts duringthe day but at night when she was tired from dancing or her head was spinning from too muchchampagnethen she thought of Ashley. Frequently when she lay drowsily in Rhetts arms withthe moonlight streaming over die bed, she thought how perfect life would be if it were onlyAshleys arms which held her so closely, if it were only Ashley who drew her black hair across hisface and wrapped it about his throat.


Once when she was thinking this, she sighed and turned her head toward the window, and after amoment she felt the heavy arm beneath her neck become like iron, and Rhetts voice spoke in thestillness: May God damn your cheating little soul to hell for all eternity!


And, getting up, he put on his shoes and left the room despite her startled protests and questions.


He reappeared the next morning as she was breakfasting in her room, disheveled, quite drunk andin his wont sarcastic mood, and neither made excuses nor gave an account of his absence.


Scarlett asked no questions and was quite cool to him, as became an injured wife, and when shehad finished the meal, she dressed under his bloodshot gaze and went shopping. He was gonewhen she returned and did not appear again until time for supper.


It was a silent meal and Scarletts temper was straining because it was her last supper in NewOrleans and she wanted to do justice to the crawfish. And she could not enjoy it under his gaze.


Nevertheless she ate large one, and drank quantity of champagne. Perhaps it was this combinationthatbrough(a) tbackheroldnightmare(a) that evening, for she awoke, cold with sweat,sobbing brokenly. She was back at Tara again and Tara was desolate. Mother was dead and with her all the strength and wisdom of the world. Nowhere in the world was there anyone to turn to,anyone to rely upon. And something terrifying was pursuing her and she was running, running tillher heart was bursting, running in a thick swimming fog, crying out, blindly seeking that nameless,unknown haven of safety that was somewhere in the mist about her.


Rhett was leaning over her when she woke, and without a word he picked her up in his arms likea child and held her close, his hard muscles comforting, his wordless murmuring soothing, untilher sobbing ceased.


Oh, Rhett, I was so cold and so hungry and so tired and I couldnt find it. I ran through the mistand I ran but I couldnt find it.


Find what, honey?


I dont know. I wish I did know.


Is it your old dream?


Oh, yes!


He gently placed her on the bed, fumbled in the darkness and lit a candle. In the light his facewith bloodshot eyes and harsh lines was as unreadable as stone. His shirt, opened to the waist,showed a brown chest covered with thick black hair. Scarlett, still shaking with fright, thought howstrong and unyielding that chest was, and she whispered: Hold me, Rhett.


Darling! he said swiftly, and picking her up he sat down in a large chair, cradling her bodyagainst him.


Oh, Rhett, its awful to be hungry.


It must be awful to dream of starvation after a seven-course dinner including that enormouscrawfish. He smiled but his eyes were kind.


Oh, Rhett, I just run and run and hunt and I cant ever find what it is Im hunting for. Itsalways hidden in the mist. I know if I could find it, Id be safe forever and ever and never be coldor hungry again.


Is it a person or a thing youre hunting?


I dont know. I never thought about it. Rhett, do you think Ill ever dream that I get there tosafety?


No, he said, smoothing her tumbled hair, I dont. Dreams arent like that. But I do think thatif you get used to being safe and warm and well fed in your everyday life, youll stop dreamingthat dream. And, Scarlett, Im going to see that you are safe.


Rhett, you are so nice.


Thanks for the crumbs from your table, Mrs. Dives. Scarlett, I want you to say to yourselfevery morning when you wake up: I cant ever be hungry again and nothing can ever touch me solong as Rhett is here and the United States government holds out.


The United States government? she questioned, sitting up, startled, tears still on her cheeks.


The ex-Confederate money has now become an honest woman. I invested most of it in government bonds.


Gods nightgown! cried Scarlett, sitting up in his lap, forgetful of her recent terror. Do youmean to tell me youve loaned your money to the Yankees?


At a fair per cent.


I dont care if its a hundred percent! You must sell them immediately. The idea of letting theYankees have the use of your money!


And what must I do with it? he questioned with a smile, noting that her eyes were no longerwide with fright.


Whywhy buy property at Five Points. Ill bet you could buy all of Five Points with themoney you have.


Thank you, but I wouldnt have Five Points. Now that the Carpetbagger government has reallygotten control of Georgia, theres no telling what may happen, I wouldnt put anything beyond theswarm of buzzards thats swooping down on Georgia now from north, east, south and west. Implaying along with them, you understand, as a good Scalawag should do, but I dont trust them.


And Im not putting my money in real estate. I prefer bonds. You can hide them. You cant hidereal estate very easily.


Do you think she began, paling as she thought of the mills and store.


I dont know. But dont look so frightened, Scarlett. Our charming new governor is a goodfriend of mine. Its just that times are too uncertain now and I dont want much of my money tiedup in real estate.


He shifted her to one knee and, leaning back, reached for a cigar and lit it. She sat with her barefeet dangling, watching the play of muscles on his brown chest, her terrors forgotten.


And while we are on the subject of real estate, Scarlett, he said, I am going to build a house.


You might have bullied Frank into living in Miss Pittys house, but not me. I dont believe I couldbear her vaporings three times a day and, moreover, I believe Uncle Peter would assassinate mebefore he would let me live under the sacred Hamilton roof. Miss Pitty can get Miss India Wilkesto stay with her and keep the bogyman away. When we get back to Atlanta we are going to stay inthe bridal suite of the National Hotel until our house is finished. Before we left Atlanta I wasdickering for that big lot on Peachtree, the one near the Leyden house. You know the one I mean?


Oh, Rhett, how lovely! I do so want a house of my own. A great big one!


Then at last we are agreed on something. What about a white stucco with wrought-iron worklike these Creole houses here?


Oh, no, Rhett. Not anything old fashioned like these New Orleans houses. I know just what Iwant. Its the newest thing because I saw a picture of it inlet me seeit was in that HarpersWeekly I was looking at. It was modeled after a Swiss chalet.


A Swiss what?


A chalet.


Spell it.


She complied.


Oh, he said and stroked his mustache.


It was lovely. It had a high mansard roof with a picket fence on top and a tower made of fancyshingles at each end. And the towers had windows with red and blue glass in them. It was sostylish looking.


I suppose it had jigsaw work on the porch banisters?


Yes.


And a fringe of wooden scrollwork hanging from the roof of the porch?


Yes. You must have seen one like it.


I havebut not in Switzerland. The Swiss are a very intelligent race and keenly alive toarchitectural beauty. Do you really want a house like that?


Oh, yes!


I had hoped that association with me might Improve your taste. Why not a Creole house or aColonial with six white columns?


I tell you I dont want anything tacky and old-fashioned looking. And inside lets have red wallpaper and red velvet portieres over all the folding doors and oh, lots of expensive walnut furnitureand grand thick carpets andoh, Rhett, everybody will be pea green when they see our house!


It is very necessary that everyone shall be envious? Well, if you like they shall be green. ButScarlett, has it occurred to you that its hardly in good taste to furnish the house on so lavish a scalewhen everyone is so poor?


I want it that way, she said obstinately. I want to make everybody whos been mean to mefeel bad. And well give big receptions thatll make the whole town wish they hadnt said suchnasty things.


But who will come to our receptions?


Why, everybody, of course.


I doubt it. The Old Guard dies but it never surrenders.


Oh, Rhett, how you run on! If youve got money, people always like you.


Not Southerners. Its harder for speculators money to get into the best parlors than for thecamel to go through the needles eye. And as for Scalawagsthats you and me, my petwell belucky if we arent spit upon. But if youd like to try, Ill back you, my dear, and Im sure I shallenjoy your campaign intensely. And while we are on the subject of money, let me make this clearto you. You can have all the cash you want for the house and all you want for your fal-lals. And ifyou like jewelry, you can have it but Im going to pick it out. You have such execrable taste, mypet. And anything you want for Wade or Ella. And if Will Benteen cant make a go of the cotton,Im willing to chip in and help out on that white elephant in Clayton County that you love somuch. Thats fair enough, isnt it?


Of course. Youre very generous.


But listen closely. Not one cent for the store and not one cent for that kindling factory ofyours.


Oh, said Scarlett, her face falling. All during the honeymoon she had been thinking how shecould bring up the subject of the thousand dollars she needed to buy fifty feet more of land toenlarge her lumber yard.


I thought you always bragged about being broad minded and not caring what people said aboutmy running a business, and youre just like every other manso afraid people will say I wear thepants in the family.


Theres never going to be any doubt in anybodys mind about who wears the pants in the Butlerfamily, drawled Rhett. I dont care what fools say. In fact, Im ill bred enough to be proud ofhaving a smart wife. I want you to keep on running the store and the mills. They are yourchildrens. When Wade grows up he wont feel right about being supported by his stepfather, andthen he can take over the management. But not one cent of mine goes into either business.


Because I dont care to contribute to the support of Ashley Wilkes.


Are you going to begin that again?


No. But you asked my reasons and I have given them. And another thing. Dont think you canjuggle books on me and lie about how much your clothes cost and how much it takes to run thehouse, so that you can use the money to buy more mules or another mill for Ashley. I intend tolook over and carefully check your expenditures and I know what things cost. Oh, dont getinsulted. Youd do it. I wouldnt put it beyond you. In fact, I wouldnt put anything beyond youwhere either Tara or Ashley is concerned. I dont mind Tara. But I must draw the line at Ashley.


Im riding you with a slack rein, my pet, but dont forget that Im riding with curb and spurs justthe same.


""""""----"""""----""


"----""""""


----"----"


"""""--------""""


"""""----"""----""""""""--------""""