Chapter 59


THERE WAS NO DOUBT in anyones mind that Bonnie Butler was running wild and needed afirm hand but she was so general a favorite that no one had the heart to attempt the necessaryfirmness. She had first gotten out of control the months when she traveled with her father. Whenshe had been with Rhett in New Orleans and Charleston she had been permitted to sit up as late asshe pleased and had gone to sleep in his arms in theaters, restaurants and at card tables. Thereafter,nothing short of force would make her go to bed at the same time as the obedient Ella. While shehad been away with him, Rhett had let her wear any dress she chose and, since that time, she hadgone into tantrums when Mammy tried to dress her in dimity frocks and pinafores instead of bluetaffeta and lace collars.


There seemed no way to regain the ground which had been lost when the child was away fromhome and later when Scarlett had been ill and at Tara. As Bonnie grew older Scarlett tried todiscipline her, tried to keep her from becoming too headstrong and spoiled, but with little success.


Rhett always sided with the child, no matter how foolish her desires or how outrageous herbehavior. He encouraged her to talk and treated her as an adult, listening to her opinions withapparent seriousness and pretending to be guided by them. As a result, Bonnie interrupted herelders whenever she pleased and contradicted her father and put him in his place. He only laughedand would not permit Scarlett even to slap the little girls hand by way of reprimand.


If she wasnt such a sweet, darling thing, shed be impossible, thought Scarlett ruefully,realizing that she had a child with a will equal to her own. She adores Rhett and he could makeher behave better if he wanted to.


But Rhett showed no inclination to make Bonnie behave. Whatever she did was right and if shewanted the moon she could have it, if he could reach it for her. His pride in her beauty, her curls,her dimples, her graceful little gestures was boundless. He loved her pertness, her high spirits andthe quaint sweet manner she had of showing her love for him. For all her spoiled and willful waysshe was such a lovable child that he lacked the heart to try to curb her. He was her god, the centerof her small world, and that was too precious for him to risk losing by reprimands.


She clung to him like a shadow. She woke him earlier than he cared to wake, sat beside him atthe table, eating alternately from his plate and her own, rode in front of him on his horse andpermitted no one but Rhett to undress her and put her to sleep in the small bed beside his.


It amused and touched Scarlett to see the iron hand with which her small child ruled her father.


Who would have thought that Rhett, of all people, would take fatherhood so seriously? Butsometimes a dart of jealousy went through Scarlett because Bonnie, at the age of four, understoodRhett better than she had ever understood him and could manage him better than she had evermanaged him.


When Bonnie was four years old, Mammy began to grumble about the impropriety of a girlchild riding a-straddle in front of her pa wid her dress flyin up. Rhett lent an attentive ear to thisremark, as he did to all Mammys remarks about the proper raising of little girls. The result was asmall brown and white Shetland pony with a long silky mane and tail and a tiny sidesaddle withsilver trimmings. Ostensibly the pony was for all three children and Rhett bought a saddle forWade too. But Wade infinitely preferred his St. Bernard dog and Ella was afraid of all animals. Sothe pony became Bonnies own and was named Mr. Butler. The only flaw in Bonnies possessivejoy was that she could not still ride astride like her father, but after he had explained how muchmore difficult it was to ride on the sidesaddle, she was content and learned rapidly. Rhetts pride inher good seat and her good hands was enormous.


Wait till shes old enough to hunt, he boasted. Therell be no one like her on any field. Ill takeher to Virginia then. Thats where the real hunting is. And Kentucky where they appreciate goodriders.


When it came to making her riding habit, as usual she had her choice of colors and as usualchose blue.


But, my darling! Not that blue velvet! The blue velvet is for a party dress for me, laughedScarlett. A nice black broadcloth is what little girls wear. Seeing the small black brows comingtogether: For Heavens sake, Rhett, tell her how unsuitable it would be and how dirty it will get.


Oh, let her have the blue velvet. If it gets dirty, well make her another one, said Rhett easily.


So Bonnie had her blue velvet habit with a skirt that trailed down the ponys side and a black hatwith a red plume in it, because Aunt Mellys stories of Jeb Stuarts plume had appealed to herimagination. On days that were bright and dear the two could be seen riding down PeachtreeStreet, Rhett reining in his big black horse to keep pace with the fat ponys gait. Sometimes theywent tearing down the quiet roads about the town, scattering chickens and dogs and children,Bonnie beating Mr. Butler with her crop, her tangled curls flying, Rhett holding in his horse with afirm hand that she might think Mr. Butler was winning the race.


When he had assured himself of her seat, her hands, her utter fearlessness, Rhett decided that thetime had come for her to learn to make the low jumps that were within the reach of Mr. Butlersshort legs. To this end, he built a hurdle in the back yard and paid Wash, one of Uncle Peters smallnephews, twenty-five cents a day to teach Mr. Butler to jump. He began with a bar two inches fromthe ground and gradually worked up the height to a foot.


This arrangement met with the disapproval of the three parties concerned, Wash, Mr. Butler andBonnie. Wash was afraid of horses and only the princely sum offered induced him to take thestubborn pony over the bar dozens of times a day; Mr. Butler, who bore with equanimity havinghis tail pulled by his small mistress and his hooves examined constantly, felt that the Creator ofponies had not intended him to put his fat body over the bar; Bonnie, who could not bear to seeanyone else upon her pony, danced with impatience while Mr. Butler was learning his lessons.


When Rhett finally decided that the pony knew his business well enough to trust Bonnie uponhim, the childs excitement was boundless. She made her first jump with flying colors and,thereafter, riding abroad with her father held no charms for her. Scarlett could not help laughing atthe pride and enthusiasm of father and daughter. She thought, however, that once the novelty hadpassed, Bonnie would turn to other things and the neighborhood would have some peace. But thissport did not pall. There was a bare track worn from the arbor at the far end of the yard to thehurdle, and all morning long the yard resounded with excited yells. Grandpa Merriwether, who hadmade the overland trip in 1849, said that the yells sounded just like an Apache after a successfulscalping.


After the first week, Bonnie begged for a higher bar, a bar that was a foot and a half from theground.


When you are six years old, said Rhett. Then youll be big enough for a higher jump and Illbuy you a bigger horse. Mr. Butlers legs arent long enough.


They are, too, I jumped Aunt Mellys rose bushes and they are normously high!


No, you must wait, said Rhett, firm for once. But the firmness gradually faded away beforeher incessant importunings and tantrums.


Oh, all right, he said with a laugh one morning and moved the narrow white cross bar higher.


If you fall off, dont cry and blame me!


Mother! screamed Bonnie, turning her head up toward Scarletts bedroom. Mother! Watchme! Daddy says I can!


Scarlett, who was combing her hair, came to the window and smiled down at the tiny excitedfigure, so absurd in the soiled blue habit.


I really must get her another habit, she thought. Though Heaven only knows how Ill makeher give up that dirty one.


Mother, watch!


Im watching dear, said Scarlett smiling.


As Rhett lifted the child and set her on the pony, Scarlett called with a swift rush of pride at thestraight back and the proud set of the head, Youre mighty pretty, precious!


So are you, said Bonnie generously and, hammering a heel into Mr. Butlers ribs, she gallopeddown the yard toward the arbor.


Mother, watch me take this one! she cried, laying on the crop.


Watch me take this one!


Memory rang a bell far back in Scarletts mind. There was something ominous about thosewords. What was it? Why couldnt she remember? She looked down at her small daughter, solightly poised on the galloping pony and her brow wrinkled as a chill swept swiftly through herbreast. Bonnie came on with a rush, her crisp black curls jerking, her blue eyes blazing.


They are like Pas eyes, thought Scarlett, Irish blue eyes and shes just like him in everyway.


And, as she thought of Gerald, the memory for which she had been rumbling came to herswiftly, came with the heart stopping clarity of summer lightning, throwing, for an instant, a wholecountryside into unnatural brightness. She could hear an Irish voice singing, hear the hard rapidpounding of hooves coming up the pasture hill at Tara, hear a reckless voice, so like the voice ofher child: Ellen! Watch me take this one!


No! she cried. No! Oh, Bonnie, stop!


Even as she leaned from the window there was a fearful sound of splintering wood, a hoarse cryfrom Rhett, a melee of blue velvet and flying hooves on the ground. Then Mr. Butler scrambled tohis feet and trotted off with an empty saddle.


On the third night after Bonnies death, Mammy waddled slowly up the kitchen steps ofMelanies house. She was dressed in black from her huge mens shoes, slashed to permit freedomfor her toes, to her black head rag. Her blurred old eyes were bloodshot and red rimmed, and miserycried out in every line of her mountainous figure. Her face was puckered in the sadbewilderment of an old ape but there was determination in her jaw.


She spoke a few soft words to Dilcey who nodded kindly, as though an unspoken armisticeexisted in their old feud. Dilcey put down the supper dishes she was holding and went quietlythrough the pantry toward the dining room. In a minute Melanie was in the kitchen, her tablenapkin in her hand, anxiety in her face.


Miss Scarlet isnt


Miss Scarlett bearin up, same as allus, said Mammy heavily. Ah din ten ter sturb yo


supper, Miss Melly. Ah kin wait tell you thoo ter tell you whut Ah got on mah mine.


Supper can wait, said Melanie. Dilcey, serve the rest of the supper. Mammy, come with me.


Mammy waddled after her, down the hall past the dining room where Ashley sat at the head ofthe table, his own little Beau beside him and Scarletts two children opposite, pairing a great clatterwith their soup spoons. The happy voices of Wade and Ella filled the room. It was like a picnic forthem to spend so long a visit with Aunt Melly. Aunt Melly was always so kind and she was especially so now. The death of their younger sister had affected them very little. Bonnie had fallenoff her pony and Mother had cried a long time and Aunt Melly had taken them home with her toplay in the back yard with Beau and have tea cakes whenever they wanted them.


Melanie led the way to the small book-lined sitting room, shut the door and motioned Mammyto the sofa.


I was going over right after supper, she said. Now that Captain Butlers mother has come, Isuppose the funeral will be tomorrow morning.


De funel. Dats jes it, said Mammy. Miss Melly, wes all in deep trouble an Ahs come teryou fer hep. Ain nuthin but weery load, honey, nuthin but weery load.


Has Miss Scarlett collapsed? questioned Melanie worriedly. Ive hardly seen her sinceBonnie She has been in her room and Captain Butler has been out of the house and


Suddenly tears began to flow down Mammys black face. Melanie sat down beside her andpatted her arm and, after a moment, Mammy lifted the hem of her black skirt and dried her eyes.


You got ter come hep us, Miss Melly. Ah done de besAh kin but it doan do no good.


Miss Scarlett


Mammy straightened.


Miss Melly, you knows Miss Scarlett wells Ah does. Whut dat chile got ter stan, de goodLawd give her strent ter stan. Disyere done broke her heart but she kin stan it. Its Mist Rhett Ahcome bout.


I have so wanted to see him but whenever Ive been there, he has either been downtown orlocked in his room with And Scarlett has looked like a ghost and wouldnt speak Tell mequickly, Mammy. You know Ill help if I can.


Mammy wiped her nose on the back of her hand. Ah say Miss Scarlett kin stan whut de Lawdsen, kase she done had ter stan a-pleny, but Mist Rhett Miss Melly, he ain never had ter stan


nuthin he din wanter stan, not nuthin. Its him Ah come ter see you bout.


Miss Melly, you got ter come home wid me, dis evenin. There was urgency in Mammysvoice. Maybe Mist Rhett lissen ter you. He allus did think a heap of yo pinion.


Oh, Mammy, what is it? What do you mean?


Mammy squared her shoulders.


Miss Melly, Mist Rhett donedone los his mine. He woan let us put Lil Miss away.


Lost his mind? Oh, Mammy, no!


Ah ain lyin. Its de Gawds truff. He ain gwine let us buhy dat chile. He done tole me sohisseff, not mon an hour ago.


But he canthe isnt


Dats huccome Ah say he los his mine.


But why


Miss Melly, Ah tell you everything. Ah oughtn tell nobody, but you is our fambly an you is deonlies one Ah kin tell. Ah tell you eveything. You knows whut a sto he set by dat chile. Ah ain


never seed no man, black or wite, set sech a sto by any chile. Look lak he go plumb crazy wenDoctah Meade say her neck broke. He grab his gun an he run right out an shoot dat po pony an,fo Gawd, Ah think he gwine shoot hisseff. Ah wuz plumb stracted whut wid Miss Scarlett in aswoon an all de neighbors in an outer de house an Mist Rhett cahyin on an jes holin dat chilean not even lettin me wash her lil face whar de grabble cut it. An wen Miss Scarlett come to, Ahthink, bress Gawd! Now dey kin comfot each other.


Again the tears began to fall but this time Mammy did not even wipe them away.


But wen she come to, she go inter de room whar he setin, holin Miss Bonnie, an she say:


Gimme mah baby whut you kilt.


Oh, no! She couldnt!


Yasm. Dat whut she say. She say: You kilt her. An Ah felt so sorry fer Mist Rhett Ah bustout cryin, kase he look lak a whup houn. An Ah say: Give dat chile ter its mammy. Ah ain


gwine have no sech goins on over mah Lil Miss. An Ah tek de chile away frum him an tek herinter her room an wash her face. An Ah hear dem talkin an it lak ter tuhn mah blood cole, whutdey say. Miss Scarlett wuz callin him a mudderer fer lettin her try ter jump dat high, an himsayin Miss Scarlett hadn never keered nuthin bout Miss Bonnie nor none of her chillun. ...


Stop, Mammy! Dont tell me any more. It isnt right for you to tell me this! cried Melanie, hermind shrinking away from the picture Mammys words evoked.


Ah knows Ah got no bizness tellin you, but mah heart too full ter know jes whut not ter say.


Den he tuck her ter de unnertakers hisseff an he bring her back an he put her in her baid in hisroom. An wen Miss Scarlett say she blong in de pahlor in de coffin, Ah thought Mist Rhettgwine hit her. An he say, right cole lak: She blong in mah room. An he tuhn ter me an he say:


Mammy, you se dat she stay right hyah tell Ah gits back. Den he light outer de house on de hawsean he wuz gone tell bout sundown. Wen he come tarin home, Ah seed dat hed been drinkin


an drinkin heavy, but he wuz cahyin it wells usual. He fling inter de house an not even speak terMiss Scarlett or Miss Pitty or any of de ladies as wuz callin, but he fly up de steps an thow opende do of his room an den he yell for me. Wen Ah comes runnin as fas as Ah kin, he wuz stanin


by de baid an it wuz so dahk in de room Ah couldn sceercely see him, kase de shutters wuz donedrawed.


An he say ter me, right fierce lak: Open dem shutters. Its dahk in hyah. An Ah fling demopen an he look at me an, fo Gawd, Miss Melly, mah knees bout give way, kase he look sostrange. Den he say: Bring lights. Bring lots of lights. An keep dem buhnin. An doan draw noshades an no shutters. Doan you know Miss Bonnies fraid of de dahk?


Melanies horror struck eyes met Mammys and Mammy nodded ominously.


Dats whut he say. Miss Bonnies fraid of de dahk.


Mammy shivered.


Wen Ah gits him a dozen candles, he say Git! An den he lock de do an dar he set wid LilMiss, an he din open de do fer Miss Scarlett even wen she beat an hollered ter him. An dats deway it been fer two days. He woan say nuthin bout de funel, an in de mawnin he lock de do an


git on his hawse an go off ter town. An he come back at sundown drunk an lock hisseff in agin,an he ain et nuthin or slept none. An now his ma, Ole Miss Butler, she come frum Chaston ferde funel an Miss Suellen an Mist Will, dey come frum Tara, but Mist Rhett woan talk ter noneof dem. Oh, Miss Melly, it been awful! An its gwine be wuss, an folks gwine talk sumpin


scanlous.


An den, dis evenin, Mammy paused and again wiped her nose on her hand. Dis evenin


Miss Scarlett ketch him in de upstairs hall wen he come in, an she go in de room wid him an shesay: De funel set fer termorrer mawnin.An he say: Do dat anAh kills you termorrer.


Oh, he must have lost his mind!


Yasm. An den dey talks kinder low an Ah doan hear all whut dey say, cept he say agin boutMiss Bonnie bein sceered of de dahk an de grabe powful dahk. An affer awile, Miss Scarlettsay You is a fine one ter tek on so, affer killin her ter please yo pride. An he say: Ain you gotno mercy? An she say: No. An Ah ain got no chile, needer. An Ahm woout wid de way youbeen ackin sence Bonnie wuz kilt. You is a scanal ter de town. You been drunk all de time an efyou doan think Ah knows whar you been spendin yo days, you is a fool. Ah knows you beendown ter dat creeters house, dat Belle Watling.


Oh, Mammy, no!


Yasm. Dat whut she said. An, Miss Melly, its de truff. Niggers knows a heap of thingsquicker dan wite folks, an Ah knowed dats whar he been but Ah ain said nuthin bout it An hedoan deny it He say: Yasm, dats whar Ah been an you neen tek on, kase you doan give a damn.


A bawdy house is a haben of refuge affer dis house of hell. An Belle is got one of de worls kines


hearts. She doan thow it up ter me dat Ah done kilt mah chile.


Oh, cried Melanie, stricken to the heart.


Her own life was so pleasant, so sheltered, so wrapped about with people who loved her, so fullof kindness that what Mammy told her was almost beyond comprehension or belief. Yet therecrawled into her mind a memory, a picture which she hastily put from her, as she would put fromher the thought of anothers nudity. Rhett had spoken of Belle Watling the day he cried with hishead on her knees. But he loved Scarlett. She could not have been mistaken that day. And ofcourse, Scarlett loved him. What had come between them? How could a husband and a wife cuteach other to pieces with such sharp knives?


Mammy took up her story heavily.


Affer a wile, Miss Scarlett come outer de room, wite as a sheet but her jaw set, an she see mestanin dar an she say: De funel be termorrer, Mammy. An she pass me by lak a ghos. Denmah heart tuhn over, kase whut Miss Scarlett say, she mean. An whut Mist Rhett say, he meantoo. An he say he kill her ef she do dat. Ah wuz plumb stracted, Miss Melly, kase Ah done hadsumpin on mah conscience all de time an it weighin me down. Miss Melly, it wuz me as sceeredLil Miss of de dahk.


Oh, but Mammy, it doesnt matternot now.


Yasm, it do. Dat whut de whole trouble. An it come ter me Ah better tell Mist Rhett even efhe kill me, kase it on mah conscience. So Ah slip in de doreal quick, fo he kin lock it, anAh say:


Mist Rhett, Ahs come ter confess. An he swung roun on me lak a crazy man an say: Git!


An, fo Gawd, Ah ain never been so sceered! But Ah say: Please, suh, Mist Rhett, let me tellyou. Its bout ter kill me. It wuz me as sceered Lil Miss of de dahk. An den, Miss Melly, Ah putmah haid down an waited fer him ter hit me. But he din say nuthin. An Ah say: Ah din meanno hahm. But, Mist Rhett, dat chile din have no caution an she wuzn sceered of nuthin. An shewuz allus gittin outer baid affer eveybody sleep an runnin roun de house barefoot An it worritme, kase Ah fraid she hut herseff. So Ah tells her dars ghoses an buggerboos in de dahk.


An denMiss Melly, you know whut he done? His face got right gentle lak an he come terme an put his han on mah arm. Dats de fust time he ever done dat. An he say: She wuz sobrave, wuzn she? Cept fer de dahk, she wuzn sceered of nuthin. An wen Ah bust out cryin hesay: Now, Mammy, an he pat me. Now, Mammy, doan you cahy on so. Ahs glad you tole me.


Ah knows you love Miss Bonnie an kase you love her, it doan matter. Its whut de heart is datmatter. Wellm dat kinder cheered me up, so Ah ventu ter say: Mist Rhett, suh, what bout defunel? Den he tuhn on me lak a wile man an his eyes glitter an he say: Good Gawd, Ah thoughtyoud unnerstan even ef nobody else din! Does you think Ahm gwine ter put mah chile away inde dahk wen she so sceered of it? Right now Ah kin hear de way she uster scream wen she wakeup in de dahk. Ah ain gwine have her sceered. Miss Melly, den Ah know he los his mine. Hedrunk an he need sleep an sumpin ter eat but dat ain all. He plumb crazy. He jes push me outerde do an say: Git de hell outer hyah!


Ah goes downstairs an Ah gits ter thinkin dat he say dar ain gwine be no funel an MissScarlett say it be termorrer mawnin an he say dar be shootin. An all de kinfolks in de house an


all de neighbors already gabblin bout it lak a flock of guinea hens, an Ah thought of you, MissMelly. You got ter come hep us.


Oh, Mammy, I couldnt intrude!


Ef you kain, who kin?


But what could I do, Mammy?


Miss Melly, Ah doan know. But you kin do sumpin. You kin talk ter Mist Rhett an maybe helissen ter you. He set a gret sto by you, Miss Melly. Maybe you doan know it, but he do. Ah donehear him say time an agin, you is de onlies gret lady he knows.


Melanie rose to her feet, confused, her heart quailing at the thought of confronting Rhett. Thethought of arguing with a man as grief crazed as the one Mammy depicted made her go cold. Thethought of entering that brightly lighted room where lay the little girl she loved so much wrung herheart. What could she do? What could she say to Rhett that would ease his grief and bring himback to reason? For a moment she stood irresolute and through the closed door came the sound ofher boys treble laughter. Like a cold knife in her heart came the thought of him dead. Suppose herBeau were lying upstairs, his little body cold and still, his merry laughter hushed.


Oh, she cried aloud, in fright, and in her mind she clutched him close to her heart. She knewhow Rhett felt. If Beau were dead, how could she put him away, alone with the wind and the rainand the darkness?


Oh! Poor, poor Captain Butler! she cried. Ill go to him now, right away.


She sped back to the dining room, said a few soft words to Ashley and surprised her little boy byhugging him close to her and kissing his blond curls passionately.


She left the house without a hat, her dinner napkin still clutched in her hand, and the pace she setwas hard for Mammys old legs. Once in Scarletts front hall, she bowed briefly to the gathering inthe library, to the frightened Miss Pittypat, the stately old Mrs. Butler, Will and Suellen. She wentup the stairs swiftly, with Mammy panting behind her. For a moment, she paused before Scarlettsclosed door but Mammy hissed, Nom, doan do dat.


Down the hall Melly went, more slowly now, and stopped in front of Rhetts room. She stoodirresolutely for a moment as though she longed to take flight. Then, bracing herself, like a smallsoldier going into battle, she knocked on the door and called softly: Please let me in, CaptainButler. Its Mrs. Wilkes. I want to see Bonnie.


The door opened quickly and Mammy, shrinking back into the shadows of the hall, saw Rhetthuge and dark against the blazing background of candles. He was swaying on his feet and Mammycould smell the whisky on his breath. He looked down at Melly for a moment and then, taking herby the arm, he pulled her into the room and shut the door.


Mammy edged herself stealthily to a chair beside the door and sank into it wearily, her shapelessbody overflowing it. She sat still, weeping silently and praying. Now and then she lifted the hem ofher dress and wiped her eyes. Strain her ears as hard as she might, she could hear no words fromthe room, only a low broken humming sound.


After an interminable period, the door cracked open and Mellys face white and strained,appeared.


Bring me a pot of coffee, quickly, and some sandwiches.


When the devil drove, Mammy could be as swift as a lithe black sixteen-year-old and hercuriosity to get into Rhetts room made her work faster. But her hope turned to disappointmentwhen Melly merely opened the door a crack and took the tray. For a long time Mammy strainedher sharp ears but she could distinguish nothing except the clatter of silver on china, and themuffled soft tones of Melanies voice. Then she heard the creaking of the bed as a heavy body fellupon it and, soon after, the sound of boots dropping to the floor. After an interval, Melanie appearedin the doorway but, strive though she might, Mammy could not see past her into the room.


Melanie looked tired and there were tears glistening on her lashes but her face was serene again.


Go tell Miss Scarlett that Captain Butler is quite willing for the funeral to take place tomorrowmorning, she whispered.


Bress Gawd! ejaculated Mammy. How on uth


Dont talk so loud. Hes going to sleep. And, Mammy, tell Miss Scarlett, too, that Ill be hereall night and you bring me some coffee. Bring it here.


Ter disyere room?


Yes, I promised Captain Butler that if he would go to sleep I would sit up by her all night. Nowgo tell Miss Scarlett, so she wont worry any more.


Mammy started off down the hall, her weight shaking the floor, her relieved heart singingHallelujah! Hallelujah! She paused thoughtfully outside of Scarletts door, her mind in a fermentof thankfulness and curiosity.


How Miss Melley done it beyon me. De angels fight on her side, Ah specs. Ahll tell MissScarlett de funel termorrer but Ah specs Ah better keep hid dat Miss Melly settin up wid Lil Miss.


Miss Scarlett ain gwine lak dat a-tall.


""""""""--------


"--------"


"----"""""


----""--------""----"