Chapter 61


SCARLETT WAS in Marietta when Rhetts urgent telegram came. There was a train leaving forAtlanta in ten minutes and she caught it, carrying no baggage except her reticule and leaving Wadeand Ella at the hotel with Prissy.


Atlanta was only twenty miles away but the train crawled interminably through the wet earlyautumn afternoon, stopping at every bypath for passengers. Panic stricken at Rhetts message, madfor speed, Scarlett almost screamed at every halt. Down the road lumbered the train through forests faintly, tiredly gold, past red hillsides still scarred with serpentine breastworks, past old battery emplacementsand weed-grown craters, down the road over which Johnstons men had retreated sobitterly, fighting every step of the way. Each station, each crossroad the conductor called was thename of a battle, the site of a skirmish. Once they would have stirred Scarlett to memories of terrorbut now she had no thought for them.


Rhetts message had been:


Mrs. Wilkes ill. Come home immediately.


Twilight had fallen when the train pulled into Atlanta and a light misting rain obscured the town.


The gas street lamps glowed dully, blobs of yellow in the fog. Rhett was waiting for her at thedepot with the carriage. The very sight of his face frightened her more than his telegram. She hadnever seen it so expressionless before.


She isnt she cried.


No. Shes still alive. Rhett assisted her into the carriage. To Mrs. Wilkes house and as fast asyou can go, he ordered the coachman.


Whats the matter with her? I didnt know she was ill. She looked all right last week. Did shehave an accident? Oh, Rhett, it isnt really as serious as you


Shes dying, said Rhett and his voice had no more expression than his face. She wants to seeyou.


Not Melly! Oh, not Melly! Whats happened to her?


Shes had a miscarriage.


Aa-misbut, Rhett, she Scarlett floundered. This information on top of the horror of hisannouncement took her breath away.


You did not know she was going to have a baby?


She could not even shake her head.


Ah, well. I suppose not. I dont think she told anyone. She wanted it to be a surprise. But Iknew.


You knew? But surely she didnt tell you!


She didnt have to tell me. I knew. Shes been sohappy these last two months I knew itcouldnt mean anything else.


But Rhett, the doctor said it would kill her to have another baby!


It has killed her, said Rhett. And to the coachman: For Gods sake, cant you drive faster?


But, Rhett, she cant be dying! II didnt and I


She hasnt your strength. Shes never had any strength. Shes never had anything but heart.


The carriage rocked to a standstill in front of the flat little house and Rhett handed her out.


Trembling, frightened, a sudden feeling of loneliness upon her, she clasped his arm.


Youre coming in, Rhett?


No, he said and got back into the carriage.


She flew up the front steps, across the porch and threw open the door. There, in the yellowlamplight were Ashley, Aunt Pitty and India. Scarlett thought: Whats India doing here? Melanietold her never to set foot in this house again. The three rose at the sight of her, Aunt Pitty bitingher trembling lips to still them, India staring at her, grief stricken and without hate. Ashley lookeddull as a sleepwalker and, as he came to her and put his hand upon her arm, he spoke like asleepwalker.


She asked for you, he said. She asked for you.


Can I see her now? She turned toward the closed door of Melanies room.


No. Dr. Meade is in there now. Im glad youve come, Scarlett


I came as quickly as I could. Scarlett shed her bonnet and her cloak. The train She isntreally Tell me, shes better, isnt she, Ashley? Speak to me! Dont look like that! She isnt really


She kept asking for you, said Ashley and looked her in the eyes. And, in his eyes she saw theanswer to her question. For a moment, her heart stood still and then a queer fear, stronger thananxiety, stronger than grief, began to beat in her breast. It cant be true, she thought vehemently,trying to push back the fear. Doctors make mistakes. I wont think its true. I cant let myself thinkits true. Ill scream if I do. I must think of something else.


I dont believe it! she cried stormily, looking into the three drawn faces as though defyingthem to contradict her. And why didnt Melanie tell me? Id never have gone to Marietta if Idknown!


Ashleys eyes awoke and were tormented.


She didnt tell anyone, Scarlett, especially not you. She was afraid youd scold her if you knew.


She wanted to wait threetill she thought it safe and sure and then surprise you all and laugh andsay how wrong the doctors had been. And she was so happy. You know how she was about babieshow much shes wanted a little girl. And everything went so well untiland then for no reasonat all


The door of Melanies room opened quietly and Dr. Meade came out into the hall, shutting thedoor behind him. He stood for a moment, his gray beard sunk on his chest, and looked at thesuddenly frozen four. His gaze fell last on Scarlett. As he came toward her, she saw that there wasgrief in his eyes and also dislike and contempt that flooded her frightened heart with guilt.


So you finally got here, he said.


Before she could answer, Ashley started toward the closed door.


Not you, yet, said the doctor. She wants to speak to Scarlett.


Doctor, said India, putting a hand on his sleeve. Though her voice was toneless, it plead moreloudly than words. Let me see her for a moment. Ive been here since this morning, waiting, butshe Let me see her for a moment. I want to tell hermust tell herthat I was wrong about something.


She did not look at Ashley or Scarlett as she spoke, but Dr. Meade allowed his cold glance to fallon Scarlett.


Ill see, Miss India, he said briefly. But only if youll give me your word not to use up herstrength telling her you were wrong. She knows you were wrong and it will only worry her to hearyou apologize.


Pitty began, timidly: Please, Dr. Meade


Miss Pitty, you know youd scream and faint.


Pitty drew up her stout little body and gave the doctor glance for glance. Her eyes were dry andthere was dignity in every curve.


Well, all right, honey, a little later, said the doctor, more kindly. Come, Scarlett.


They tiptoed down the hall to the closed door and the doctor put his hand on Scarletts shoulderin a hard grip.


Now, Miss, he whispered briefly, no hysterics and no deathbed confessions from you or,before God, I will wring your neck! Dont give me any of your innocent stares. You know what Imean. Miss Melly is going to die easily and you arent going to ease your own conscience bytelling her anything about Ashley. Ive never harmed a woman yet, but if you say anything nowyoull answer to me.


He opened the door before she could answer, pushed her into the room and closed the doorbehind her. The little room, cheaply furnished in black walnut, was in semi-darkness, the lampshaded with a newspaper. It was as small and prim a room as a schoolgirls, the narrow little low-backed bed, the plain net curtains looped back, the clean faded rag rugs on the floor, were sodifferent from the lavishness of Scarletts own bedroom with its towering carved furniture, pinkbrocade draperies and rose-strewn carpet.


Melanie lay in the bed, her figure under the counterpane shrunken and flat like a little girls.


Two black braids fell on either side of her face and her closed eyes were sunken in twin purplecircles. At the sight of her Scarlett stood transfixed, leaning against the door. Despite the gloom ofthe room, she could see that Melanies face was of a waxy yellow color. It was drained of lifesblood and there was a pinched look about the nose. Until that moment, Scarlett had hoped Dr.


Meade was mistaken. But now she knew. In the hospitals during the war she had seen too manyfaces wearing this pinched look not to know what it inevitably presaged.


Melanie was dying, but for a moment Scarletts mind refused to take it in. Melanie could notdie. It was impossible for her to die. God wouldnt let her die when she, Scarlett, needed her somuch. Never before had it occurred to her that she needed Melanie. But now, the truth surged in,down to the deepest recesses of her soul. She had relied on Melanie, even as she had relied uponherself, and she had never known it. Now, Melanie was dying and Scarlett knew she could not getalong without her. Now, as she tiptoed across the room toward the quiet figure, panic clutching ather heart, she knew that Melanie had been her sword and her shield, her comfort and her strength.


I must hold her! I cant let her get away! she thought and sank beside the bed with a rustle of skirts. Hastily she grasped the limp hand lying on the coverlet and was frightened anew by its chill.


Its me, Melly, she said.


Melanies eyes opened a slit and then, as if having satisfied herself that it was really Scarlett, sheclosed them again. After a pause she drew a breath and whispered:


Promise me?


Oh, anything!


Beaulook after him.


Scarlett could only nod, a strangled feeling in her throat, and she gently pressed the hand sheheld by way of assent.


I give him to you. There was the faintest trace of a smile. I gave him to you, once beforemember?before he was born.


Did she remember? Could she ever forget that time? Almost as clearly as if that dreadful dayhad returned, she could feel the stifling heat of the September noon, remembering her terror of theYankees, hear the tramp of the retreating troops, recall Melanies voice begging her to take thebaby should she dieremember, too, how she had hated Melanie that day and hoped that shewould die.


Ive killed her, she thought, in superstitious agony. I wished so often she would die and Godheard me and is punishing me.


Oh, Melly, dont talk like that! You know youll pull through this


No. Promise.


Scarlett gulped.


You know I promise. Ill treat him like he was my own boy.


College? asked Melanies fault flat voice.


Oh, yes! The university and Harvard and Europe and anything he wantsandanda ponyand music lessons Oh, please, Melly, do try! Do make an effort!


The silence fell again and on Melanies face there were signs of a struggle to gather strength tospeak.


Ashley, she said. Ashley and you Her voice faltered into stillness.


At the mention of Ashleys name, Scarletts heart stood still, cold as granite within her. Melaniehad known all the time. Scarlett dropped her head on the coverlet and a sob that would not risecaught her throat with a cruel hand. Melanie knew. Scarlett was beyond shame now, beyond anyfeeling save a wild remorse that she had hurt this gentle creature throughout the long years.


Melanie had knownand yet, she had remained her loyal friend. Oh, if she could only live thoseyears over again! She would never even let her eyes meet those of Ashley.


O God, she prayed rapidly, do, please, let her live! Ill make it up to her. Ill be so good toher. Ill never even speak to Ashley again as long as I live, if Youll only let her get well!


Ashley, said Melanie feebly and her fingers readied out to touch Scarletts bowed head. Herthumb and forefinger tugged with no more strength than that of a baby at Scarletts hair. Scarlettknew what that meant, knew Melanie wanted her to look up. But she could not, could not meetMelanies eyes and read that knowledge in them.


Ashley, Melanie whispered again and Scarlett gripped herself. When she looked God in theface on the Day of Judgment and read her sentence in His eyes, it would not be as bad as this. Hersoul cringed but she raised her head.


She saw only the same dark loving eyes, sunken and drowsy with death, the same tender mouthtiredly fighting pain for breath. No reproach was there, no accusation and no fearonly an anxietythat she might not find strength for words.


For a moment Scarlett was too stunned to even feel relief. Then, as she held Melanies handmore closely, a flood of warm gratitude to God swept over her and, for the first time since herchildhood, she said a humble, unselfish prayer.


Thank You, God. I know Im not worth it but thank You for not letting her know.


What about Ashley, Melly?


Youlllook after him?


Oh, yes.


He catches coldso easily.


There was a pause.


Look afterhis businessyou understand?


Yes, I understand. I will.


She made a great effort.


Ashley isntpractical.


Only death could have forced that disloyalty from Melanie.


Look after him, Scarlettbutdont ever let him know.


Ill look after him and the business too, and Ill never let him know. Ill just kind of suggestthings to him.


Melanie managed a small smile but it was a triumphant one as her eyes met Scarletts again.


Their glance sealed the bargain that the protection of Ashley Wilkes from a too harsh world waspassing from one woman to another and that Ashleys masculine pride should never be humbled bythis knowledge.


Now the struggle went out of the tired face as though with Scarletts promise, ease had come toher.


Youre so smartso bravealways been so good to me


At these words, the sob came freely to Scarletts throat and she clapped her hand over hermouth. Now, she was going to bawl like a child and cry out: Ive been a devil! Ive wronged you so! I never did anything for you! It was all for Ashley.


She rose to her feet abruptly, sinking her teeth into her thumb to regain her control. Rhettswords came back to her again, She loves you. Let that be your cross. Well, the cross was heaviernow. It was bad enough that she had tried by every art to take Ashley from her. But now it wasworse that Melanie, who had trusted her blindly through life, was laying the same love and trust onher in death. No, she could not speak. She could not even say again: Make an effort to live. Shemust let her go easily, without a struggle, without tears, without sorrow.


The door opened slightly and Dr. Meade stood on the threshold, beckoning imperiously. Scarlettbent over the bed, choking back her tears and taking Melanies hand, laid it against her cheek.


Good night, she said, and her voice was steadier than she thought it possibly could be.


Promise me came the whisper, very softly now.


Anything, darling.


Captain Butlerbe kind to him. Heloves you so.


Rhett? thought Scarlett, bewildered, and the words meant nothing to her.


Yes, indeed, she said automatically and, pressing a light kiss on the hand, laid it back on thebed.


Tell the ladies to come in immediately, whispered the doctor as she passed through the door.


Through blurred eyes she saw India and Pitty follow the doctor into the room, holding theirskirts close to their sides to keep them from rustling. The door closed behind them and the housewas still. Ashley was nowhere to be seen. Scarlett leaned her head against the wall, like a naughtychild in a corner, and rubbed her aching throat.


Behind that door, Melanie was going and, with her, the strength upon which she had reliedunknowingly for so many years. Why, oh, why, had she not realized before this how much sheloved and needed Melanie? But who would have thought of small plain Melanie as a tower ofstrength? Melanie who was shy to tears before strangers, timid about raising her voice in anopinion of her own, fearful of the disapproval of old ladies, Melanie who lacked the courage to sayBoo to a goose? And yetScarletts mind went back through the years to the still, hot noon at Tara when gray smokecurled above a blue-clad body and Melanie stood at the top of the stairs with Charles saber in herhand. Scarlett remembered that she had thought at the time: How silly! Melly couldnt even heftthat sword! But now she knew that had the necessity arisen, Melanie would have charged downthose stairs and killed the Yankeeor been killed herself.


Yes, Melanie had been there that day with a sword in her small hand, ready to do battle for her.


And now, as Scarlett looked sadly back, she realized that Melanie had always been there beside herwith a sword in her hand, unobtrusive as her own shadow, loving her, fighting for her with blindpassionate loyalty, fighting Yankees, fire, hunger, poverty, public opinion and even her belovedblood kin.


Scarlett felt her courage and self-confidence ooze from her as she realized that the sword which had flashed between her and the world was sheathed forever.


Melly is the only woman friend I ever had, she thought forlornly, the only woman exceptMother who really loved me. Shes like Mother, too. Everyone who knew her has clung to herskirts.


Suddenly it was as if Ellen were lying behind that closed door, leaving the world for a secondtime. Suddenly she was standing at Tara again with the world about her ears, desolate with theknowledge that she could not face life without the terrible strength of the weak, the gentle, thetender hearted.


She stood in the hall, irresolute, frightened, and the glaring light of the fire in the sitting roomthrew tall dim shadows on the walls about her. The house was utterly still and the stillness soakedinto her like a fine chill rain. Ashley! Where was Ashley?


She went toward the sitting room seeking him like a cold animal seeking the fire but he was notthere. She must find him. She had discovered Melanies strength and her dependence on it only tolose it in the moment of discovery but there was still Ashley left. There was Ashley who wasstrong and wise and comforting. In Ashley and his love lay strength upon which to lay herweakness, courage to bolster her fear, ease for her sorrow.


He must be in his room, she thought, and tiptoeing down the hall, she knocked softly. There wasno answer, so she pushed the door open. Ashley was standing in front of the dresser, looking at apair of Melanies mended gloves. First he picked up one and looked at it, as though he had neverseen it before. Then he laid it down gently, as though it were made of glass, and picked up theother one.


She said:  Ashley! in a trembling voice and he turned slowly and looked at her. The drowsyaloofness had gone from his gray eyes and they were wide and unmasked. In them she saw fearthat matched her own fear, helplessness weaker than her own, bewilderment more profound thanshe would ever know. The feeling of dread which had possessed her in the hall deepened as shesaw his face. She went toward him.


Im frightened, she said. Oh, Ashley, hold me. Im so frightened!


He made no move to her but stared, gripping the glove tightly in both hands. She put a hand onhis arm and whispered: What is it?


His eyes searched her intently, hunting, hunting desperately for something he did not find.


Finally he spoke and his voice was not his own.


I was wanting you, he said. I was going to run and find yourun like a child wantingcomfortand I find a child, more frightened, running to me.


Not youyou cant be frightened, she cried. Nothing has ever frightened you. But IYouve always been so strong


If Ive ever been strong, it was because she was behind me, he said, his voice breaking, and helooked down at the glove and smoothed the fingers. Andandall the strength I ever had isgoing with her.


There was such a note of wild despair in his low voice that she dropped her hand from his armand stepped back. And in the heavy silence that fell between them, she felt that she reallyunderstood him for the first time in her life.


Why she said slowly, why, Ashley, you love her, dont you?


He spoke as with an effort.


She is the only dream I ever had that lived and breathed and did not die in the face of reality.


Dreams! she thought, an old irritation stirring. Always dreams with him! Never commonsense!


With a heart that was heavy and a little bitter, she said: Youve been such a fool, Ashley. Whycouldnt you see that she was worth a million of me?


Scarlett, please! If you only knew what Ive gone through since the doctor


What youve gone through! Dont you think that I Oh, Ashley, you should have known,years ago, that you loved her and not me! Why didnt you! Everything would have been sodifferent, so Oh, you should have realized and not kept me dangling with all your talk abouthonor and sacrifice! If youd told me, years ago, Id have It would have killed me but I couldhave stood it somehow. But you wait till now, till Mellys dying, to find it out and now its too lateto do anything. Oh, Ashley, men are supposed to know such thingsnot women! You should haveseen so clearly that you loved her all the time and only wanted me likelike Rhett wants thatWatling woman!


He winced at her words but his eyes still met hers, imploring silence, comfort. Every line of hisface admitted the truth of her words. The very droop of his shoulders showed that his own self-castigation was more cruel than any she could give. He stood silent before her, clutching the glovethough it were an understanding hand and, in the stillness that followed her words, herind(as) ignation fell away and pity, tinged with contempt, took its place. Her conscience smote her. Shewas kicking a beaten and defenseless manand she had promised Melanie that she would lookafter him.


And just as soon as I promised her, I said mean, hurting things to him and theres no need forme to say them or for anyone to say them. He knows the truth and its killing him, she thoughtdesolately. Hes not grown up. Hes a child, like me, and hes sick with fear at losing her. Mellyknew how it would beMelly knew him far better than I do. Thats why she said look after himand Beau, in the same breath. How can Ashley ever stand this? I can stand it. I can stand anything.


Ive had to stand so much. But he canthe cant stand anything without her.


Forgive me, darling, she said gently, putting out her arms. I know what you must besuffering. But remember, she doesnt know anythingshe never even suspected God was thatgood to us.


He came to her quickly and his arms went round her blindly. She tiptoed to bring her warmcheek comfortingly against his and with one hand she smoothed the back of his hair.


Dont cry, sweet. Shed want you to be brave. Shell want to see you in a moment and you mustbe brave. She mustnt see that youve been crying. It would worry her.


He held her in a grip that made breathing difficult and his choking voice was in her ear.


What will I do? I cantI cant live without her!


I cant either, she thought, shuddering away from the picture of the long years to come,without Melanie. But she caught herself in a strong grasp. Ashley was depending on her, Melaniewas depending on her. As once before, in the moonlight at Tara, drunk, exhausted, she had thought:


Burdens are for shoulders strong enough to carry them. Well, her shoulders were strong andAshleys were not. She squared her shoulders for the load and with a calmness she was far fromfeeling, kissed his wet cheek without fever or longing or passion, only with cool gentleness.


We shall managesomehow, she said.


A door opened with sudden violence into the hall and Dr. Meade called with sharp urgency:


Ashley! Quick!


My God! Shes gone! thought Scarlett And Ashley didnt get to tell her good-by! But maybe


Hurry! she cried aloud, giving him a push, for he stood staring like one stunned. Hurry!


She pulled open the door and motioned him through. Galvanized by her words, he ran into thehall, the glove still clasped closely in his hand. She heard his rapid steps for a moment and then theclosing of a door.


She said, My God! again and walking slowly to the bed, sat down upon it and dropped herhead in her hands. She was suddenly tired, more tired than she had ever been in all her life. Withthe sound of the closing door, the strain under which she had been laboring, the strain which hadgiven her strength, suddenly snapped. She felt exhausted in body and drained of emotions. Nowshe felt no sorrow or remorse, no fear or amazement. She was tired and her mind ticked awaydully, mechanically, as the clock on the mantel.


Out of the dullness, one thought arose. Ashley did not love her and had never really loved herand the knowledge did not hurt. It should hurt. She should be desolate, broken hearted, ready toscream at fate. She had relied upon his love for so long. It had upheld her through so many darkplaces. Yet, there the truth was. He did not love her and she did not care. She did not care becauseshe did not love him. She did not love him and so nothing he could do or say could hurt her.


She lay down on the bed and put her head on the pillow tiredly. Useless to try to combat theidea, useless to say to herself: But I do love him. Ive loved him for years. Love cant change toapathy in a minute.


But it could change and it had changed.


He never really existed at all, except in my imagination, she thought wearily. I lovedsomething I made up, something thats just as dead as Melly is. I made a pretty suit of clothes andfell in love with it. And when Ashley came riding along, so handsome, so different, I put that suiton him and made him wear it whether it fitted him or not. And I wouldnt see what he really was. Ikept on loving the pretty clothesand not him at all.


Now she could look back down the long years and see herself in green flowered dimity, standing in the sunshine at Tara, thrilled by the young horseman with his blond hair shining like a silverhelmet. She could see so clearly now that he was only a childish fancy, no more important reallythan her spoiled desire for the aquamarine earbobs she had coaxed out of Gerald. For, once sheowned the earbobs, they had lost their value, as everything except money lost its value once it washers. And so he, too, would have become cheap if, in those first far-away days, she had ever hadthe satisfaction of refusing to marry him. If she had ever had him at her mercy, seen him grownpassionate, importunate, jealous, sulky, pleading, like the other boys, the wild infatuation whichhad possessed her would have passed, blowing away as lightly as mist before sunshine and lightwind when she met a new man.


What a fool Ive been, she thought bitterly. And now Ive got to pay for it What Ive wishedfor so often has happened. Ive wished Melly was dead so I could have him. And now shes deadand Ive got him and I dont want him. His damned honor will make him ask me if I want todivorce Rhett and marry him. Marry him? I wouldnt have him on a silver platter! But, just thesame Ive got him round my neck for the rest of my life. As long as I live Ill have to look afterhim and see that he doesnt starve and that people dont hurt his feelings. Hell be just anotherchild, clinging to my skirts. Ive lost my lover and Ive got another child. And if I hadnt promisedMelly, IdI wouldnt care if I never saw him again.


"""""--------"


""""-----""


""------------""


----------------"


"----------------"


""--------"----


----------------"


""----""----"


------------""""


--------""


""--------"----""--------"""--------"


"""----"--------------------"----


""--------"


""----""""