Chapter 40


SCARLETT SLEPT little that night. When the dawn had come and the sun was creeping overthe black pines on the hills to the east, she rose from her tumbled bed and, seating herself on astool by the window, laid her tired head on her arm and looked out over the barn yard and orchardof Tara toward the cotton fields. Everything was fresh and dewy and silent and green and the sightof the cotton fields brought a measure of balm and comfort to her sore heart. Tara, at sunrise,looked loved, well tended and at peace, for all that its master lay dead. The squatty log chickenhouse was clay daubed against rats weasels and clean with whitewash, and so was the log stable.


The garden with its rows of corn, bright-yellow squash, butter beans and turnips was well weededand neatly fenced with split-oak rails. The orchard was cleared of underbrush and only daisiesgrew beneath the long rows of trees. The sun picked out with faint glistening the apples and thefurred pink peaches half hidden in the green leaves. Beyond lay the curving rows of cotton, still and green under the gold of the new sky. The ducks and chickens were waddling and strutting offtoward the fields, for under the bushes in the soft plowed earth were found the choicest worms andslugs.


Scarletts heart swelled with affection and gratitude to Will who had done all of this. Even herloyalty to Ashley could not make her believe he had been responsible for much of this well-being,for Taras bloom was not the work of a planter-aristocrat, but of the plodding, tireless smallfarmer who loved his land. It was a two-horse farm, not the lordly plantation of other days withpastures full of mules and fine horses and cotton and corn stretching as far as eye could see. Butwhat there was of it was good and the acres that were lying fallow could be reclaimed when timesgrew better, and they would be the more fertile for their rest.


Will had done more than merely farm a few acres. He had kept sternly at bay those two enemiesof Georgia planters, the seedling pine and the blackberry brambles. They had not stealthily takengarden and pasture and cotton field and lawn and reared themselves insolently by the porches ofTara, as they were doing on numberless plantations throughout the state.


Scarletts heart failed a beat when she thought how close Tara had come to going back towilderness. Between herself and Will, they had done a good job. They had held off the Yankees,the Carpetbaggers and the encroachments of Nature. And, best of all, Will had told her that afterthe cotton came in in the fall, she need send no more moneyunless some other Carpetbaggercoveted Tara and skyrocketed the taxes. Scarlett knew Will would have a hard pull without herhelp but she admired and respected his independence. As long as he was in the position of hiredhelp he would take her money, but now that he was to become her brother-in-law and the man ofthe house, he intended to stand on his own efforts. Yes, Will was something the Lord had provided.


Pork had dug the grave the night before, close by Ellens grave, and he stood, spade in hand,behind the moist red clay he was soon to shovel back in place. Scarlett stood behind him in thepatchy shade of a gnarled low-limbed cedar, the hot sun of the June morning dappling her, andtried to keep her eyes away from the red trench in front of her. Jim Tarleton, little Hugh Munroe,Alex Fontaine and old man McRaes youngest grandson came slowly and awkwardly down thepath from the house bearing Geralds coffin on two lengths of split oak. Behind them, at arespectful distance, followed a large straggling crowd of neighbors and friends, shabbily dressed,silent. As they came down the sunny path through the garden, Pork bowed his head upon the top ofthe spade handle and cried; and Scarlett saw with incurious surprise that the kinks on his head, sojettily black when she went to Atlanta a few months before, were now grizzled.


She thanked God tiredly that she had cried all her tears the night before, so now she could standerect and dry eyed. The sound of Suellens tears, put back of her shoulder, irritated her unbearablyand she had to clench her fists to keep from turning and slapping the swollen face. Sue had beenthe cause of her fathers death, whether she intended it or not, and she should have the decency tocontrol herself in front of the hostile neighbors. Not a single person had spoken to her that morningor given her one look of sympathy. They had kissed Scarlett quietly, shaken her hand, murmuredkind words to Carreen and even to Pork but had looked through Suellen as if she were not there.


To them she had done worse than murder her father. She had tried to betray him into disloyalty to the South. And to that grim and close-knit community it was as if she had tried to betray thehonor of them all. She had broken the solid front the County presented to the world. By herattempt to get money from the Yankee government she had aligned herself with Carpetbaggers andScalawags, more hated enemies than the Yankee soldiers had ever been. She, a member of an oldand staunchly Confederate family, a planters family, had gone over to the enemy and by so doinghad brought shame on every family in the County.


The mourners were seething with indignation and downcast with sorrow, especially three ofthemold man McRae, who had been Geralds crony since he came to the up-country fromSavannah so many years before, Grandma Fontaine who loved him because he was Ellenshusband, and Mrs. Tarleton who had been closer to him than to any of her neighbors because, asshe often said, he was the only man in the County who knew a stallion from a gelding.


The sight of the stormy faces of these three in the dim parlor where Gerald lay before the funeralhad caused Ashley and Will some uneasiness and they had retired to Ellens office for aconsultation.


Some of them are goin to say somethin about Suellen, said Will abruptly, biting his straw inhalf. They think they got just cause to say somethin. Maybe they have. It aint for me to say. But,Ashley, whether theyre right or not, well have to resent it, bein the men of the family, and thentherell be trouble. Cant nobody do nothin with old man McRae because hes deaf as a post andcant hear folks tryin to shut him up. And you know there aint nobody in Gods world everstopped Grandma Fontaine from speakin her mind. And as for Mrs. Tarletondid you see her rollthem russet eyes of hers every time she looked at Sue? Shes got her ears laid back and canthardly wait. If they say somethin, we got to take it up and we got enough trouble at Tara nowwithout bein at outs with our neighbors.


Ashley sighed worriedly. He knew the tempers of his neighbors better than Will did and heremembered that fully half of the quarrels and some of the shootings of the days before the warhad risen from the County custom of saying a few words over the coffins of departed neighbors.


Generally the words were eulogistic in the extreme but occasionally they were not. Sometimes,words meant in the utmost respect were misconstrued by overstrung relatives of the dead andscarcely were the last shovels of earth mounded above the coffin before trouble began.


In the absence of a priest Ashley was to conduct the services with the aid of Carreens Book ofDevotions, the assistance of the Methodist and Baptist preachers of Jonesboro and Fayettevillehaving been tactfully refused. Carreen, more devoutly Catholic than her sisters, had been veryupset that Scarlett had neglected to bring a priest from Atlanta with her and had only been a littleeased by the reminder that when the priest came down to marry Will and Suellen, he could read theservices over Gerald. It was she who objected to the neighboring Protestant preachers and gave thematter into Ashleys hands, marking passages in her book for him to read. Ashley, leaning againstthe old secretary, knew that the responsibility for preventing trouble lay with him and, knowing thehair-trigger tempers of the County, was at a loss as to how to proceed.


Theres no help for it, Will, he said, rumpling his bright hair. I cant knock Grandma Fontainedown or old man McRae either, and I cant hold my hand over Mrs. Tarletons mouth. And themildest thing theyll say is that Suellen is a murderess and a traitor and but for her Mr. OHara would still be alive. Damn this custom of speaking over the dead. Its barbarous.


Look, Ash, said Will slowly. I aint aimin to have nobody say nothin against Suellen, nomatter what they think. You leave it to me. When youve finished with the readin and the prayin


and you say: If anyone would like to say a few words, you look right at me, so I can speak first.


But Scarlett, watching the pallbearers difficulty in getting the coffin through the narrowentrance into the burying ground, had no thought of trouble to come after the funeral. She wasthinking with a leaden heart that in burying Gerald she was burying one of the last links that joinedher to the old days of happiness and irresponsibility.


Finally the pallbearers set the coffin down near the grave and stood clenching and unclenchingtheir aching fingers. Ashley, Melanie and Will filed into the enclosure and stood behind the OHaragirls. All the closer neighbors who could crowd in were behind them and the others stood outsidethe brick wall. Scarlett, really seeing them for the first time, was surprised and touched by the sizeof the crowd. With transportation so limited it was kind of so many to come. There were fifty orsixty people there, some of them from so far away she wondered how they had heard in time tocome. There were whole families from Jonesboro and Fayetteville and Lovejoy and with them afew negro servants. Many small farmers from far across the river were present and Crackers fromthe backwoods and a scattering of swamp folk.


The swamp men were lean bearded giants inhomespun, coon-skin caps on their heads, their rifles easy in the crooks of their arms, their wads oftobacco stilled in their cheeks. Their women were with them, their bare feet sunk in the soft redearth, their lower lips full of snuff. Their faces beneath their sun-bonnets were sallow and malarial-looking but shining clean and their freshly ironed calicoes glistened with starch.


The near neighbors were there in full force. Grandma Fontaine, withered, wrinkled and yellowas an old molted bird, was leaning on her cane, and behind her were Sally Munroe Fontaine andYoung Miss Fontaine. They were trying vainly by whispered pleas and jerks at her skirt to makethe old lady sit down on the brick wall. Grandmas husband, the Old Doctor, was not there. He haddied two months before and much of the bright malicious joy of life had gone from her old eyes.


Cathleen Calvert Hilton stood alone as befitted one whose husband had helped bring about thepresent tragedy, her faded sunbonnet hiding her bowed face. Scarlett saw with amazement that herpercale dress had grease spots on it and her hands were freckled and unclean. There were evenblack crescents under her fingernails. There was nothing of quality folks about Cathleen now. Shelooked Cracker, even worse. She looked poor white, shiftless, slovenly, trifling.


Shell be dipping snuff soon, if she isnt doing it already, thought Scarlett in horror. GoodLord! What a comedown!


She shuddered, turning her eyes from Cathleen as she realized how narrow was the chasmbetween quality folk and poor whites.


There but for a lot of gumption am I, she thought, and pride surged through her as she realizedthat she and Cathleen had started with the same equipment after the surrenderempty hands andwhat they had in their heads.


I havent done so bad, she thought, lifting her chin and smiling.


But she stopped in mid-smile as she saw the scandalized eyes of Mrs. Tarleton upon her. Her eyes were red-rimmed from tears and, after giving Scarlett a reproving look, she turned her gazeback to Suellen, a fierce angry gaze that boded ill for her. Behind her and her husband were thefour Tarleton girls, their red locks indecorous notes in the solemn occasion, their russet eyes stilllooking like the eyes of vital young animals, spirited and dangerous.


Feet were stilled, hats were removed, hands folded and skirts rustled into quietness as Ashleystepped forward with Carreens worn Book of Devotions in his hand. He stood for a momentlooking down, the sun glittering on his golden head. A deep silence fell on the crowd, so deep thatthe harsh whisper of the wind in the magnolia leaves came clear to their ears and the far-offrepetitious note of a mockingbird sounded unendurably loud and sad. Ashley began to read theprayers and all heads bowed as his resonant, beautifully modulated voice rolled out the brief anddignified words.


Oh! thought Scarlett, her throat constricting. How beautiful his voice is! If anyone has to dothis for Pa, Im glad its Ashley. Id rather have him than a priest. Id rather have Pa buried by oneof his own folks than a stranger.


When Ashley came to the part of the prayers concerning the souls in Purgatory, which Carreenhad marked for him to read, he abruptly closed the book. Only Carreen noticed the omission andlooked up puzzled, as he began the Lords Prayer. Ashley knew that half the people present hadnever heard of Purgatory and those who had would take it as a personal affront, if he insinuated,even in prayer, that so fine a man as Mr. OHara had not gone straight to Heaven. So, in deferenceto public opinion, he skipped all mention of Purgatory. The gathering joined heartily in the LordsPrayer but their voices trailed off into embarrassed silence when he began the Hail Mary. They hadnever heard that prayer and they looked furtively at each other as the OHara girls, Melanie and theTara servants gave the response: Pray for us, now and at the hour of our death. Amen.


Then Ashley raised his head and stood for a moment, uncertain. The eyes of the neighbors wereexpectantly upon him as they settled themselves in easier positions for a long harangue. They werewaiting for him to go on with the service, for it did not occur to any of them that he was at the endof the Catholic prayers. County funerals were always long. The Baptist and Methodist ministerswho performed them had no set prayers but extemporized as the circumstances demanded andseldom stopped before all mourners were in tears and the bereaved feminine relatives screamingwith grief. The neighbors would have been shocked, aggrieved and indignant, had these briefprayers been all the service over the body of their loved friend, and no one knew this better thanAshley. The matter would be discussed at dinner tables for weeks and the opinion of the Countywould be that the OHara girls had not shown proper respect for their father.


So he threw a quick apologetic glance at Carreen and, bowing his head again, began recitingfrom memory the Episcopal burial service which he had often read over slaves buried at TwelveOaks.


I am the Resurrection and the Life ... and whosoever ... believeth in Me shall never die.


It did not come back to him readily and he spoke slowly, occasionally falling silent for a spaceas he waited for phrases to rise from his memory. But this measured delivery made his words moreimpressive, and mourners who had been dry-eyed before began now to reach for handkerchiefs.


Sturdy Baptists and Methodists all, they thought it the Catholic ceremony and immediately rear ranged their first opinion that the Catholic services were cold and Popish. Scarlett and Suellenwere equally ignorant and thought the words comforting and beautiful. Only Melanie and Carreenrealized that a devoutly Catholic Irishman was being laid to rest by the Church of Englandsservice. And Carreen was too stunned by grief and her hurt at Ashleys treachery to interfere.


When he had finished, Ashley opened wide his sad gray eyes and looked about the crowd. Aftera pause, his eyes caught those of Will and he said: Is there anyone present who would like to say aword?


Mrs. Tarleton twitched nervously but before she could act, Will stumped forward and standing atthe head of the coffin began to speak.


Friends, he began in his flat voice, maybe you think Im gettin above myself, speakin firstme who never knew Mr. OHara till bout a year ago when you all have known him twentyyears or more. But this here is my excuse. If hed lived a month or so longer, Id have had the rightto call him Pa.


A startled ripple went over the crowd. They were too well bred to whisper but they shifted ontheir feet and stared at Carreens bowed head. Everyone knew his dumb devotion to her. Seeing thedirection in which all eyes were cast, Will went on as if he had taken no note.


So bein as how Im to marry Miss Suellen as soon as the priest comes down from Atlanta, Ithought maybe that gives me the right to speak first.


The last part of his speech was lost in a faint sibilant buzz that went through the gathering, anangry beelike buzz. There were indignation and disappointment in the sound. Everyone liked Will,everyone respected him for what he had done for Tara. Everyone knew his affections lay withCarreen, so the news that he was to marry the neighborhood pariah instead sat ill upon them. Goodold Will marrying that nasty, sneaking little Suellen OHara!


For a moment the air was tense. Mrs. Tarletons eyes began to snap and her lips to shapesoundless words. In the silence, old man McRaes high voice could be heard imploring hisgrandson to tell him what had been said. Will faced them all, still mild of face, but there was somethingin his pale blue eyes which dared them to say one word about his future wife. For a momentthe balance hung between the honest affection everyone had for Will and their contempt forSuellen. And Will won. He continued as if his pause had been a natural one.


I never knew Mr. OHara in his prime like you all done. All I knew personally was a fine oldgentleman who was a mite addled. But Ive heard tell from you all bout what he used to be like.


And I want to say this. He was a fightin Irishman and a Southern gentleman and as loyal aConfederate as ever lived. You cant get no better combination than that. And we aint likely to seemany more like him, because the times that bred men like him are as dead as he is. He was born ina furrin country but the man were buryin here today was more of a Georgian than any of usmournin him. He lived our life, he loved our land and, when you come right down to it, he diedfor our Cause, same as the soldiers did. He was one of us and he had our good points and our badpoints and he had our strength and he had our failins. He had our good points in that couldntnothin stop him when his mind was made up and he warnt scared of nothin that walked in shoeleather.


There warnt nothin that come to him from the outside that could lick him.


He warnt scared of the English government when they wanted to hang him. He just lit out andleft home. And when he come to this country and was pore, that didnt scare him a mite neither. Hewent to work and he made his money. And he warnt scared to tackle this section when it was partwild and the Injuns had just been run out of it. He made a big plantation out of a wilderness. Andwhen the war come on and his money begun to go, he warnt scared to be pore again. And whenthe Yankees come through Tara and might of burnt him out or killed him, he warnt fazed a bit andhe warnt licked neither. He just planted his front feet and stood his ground. Thats why I say hehad our good points. There aint nothin from the outside can lick any of us.


But he had our failins too, cause he could be licked from the inside. I mean to say that whatthe whole world couldnt do, his own heart could. When Mrs. OHara died, his heart died too andhe was licked. And what we seen walking round here warnt him.


Will paused and his eyes went quietly around the circle of faces. The crowd stood in the hot sunas if enchanted to the ground and whatever wrath they had felt for Suellen was forgotten. Willseyes rested for a moment on Scarlett and they crinkled slightly at the corners as if he wereinwardly smiling comfort to her. Scarlett, who had been fighting back rising tears, did feelcomforted. Will was talking common sense instead of a lot of tootle about reunions in another andbetter world and submitting her will to Gods. And Scarlett had always found strength and comfortin common sense.


And I dont want none of you to think the less of him for breakin like he done. All you all andme, too, are like him. We got the same weakness and failin. There aint nothin that walks can lickus, any more than it could lick him, not Yankees nor Carpetbaggers nor hard times nor high taxesnor even downright starvation. But that weakness thats in our hearts can lick us in the time it takesto bat your eye. It aint always losin someone you love that does it, like it done Mr. OHara.


Everybodys mainspring is different. And I want to say thisfolks whose mainsprings are bustedare better dead. There aint no place for them in the world these days, and theyre happier bein


dead. ... Thats why Im sayin you all aint got no cause to grieve for Mr. OHara now. The time togrieve was back when Sherman come through and he lost Mrs. OHara. Now that his bodys goneto join his heart, I dont see that we got reason to mourn, unless were pretty damned selfish, andIm sayin it who loved him like he was my own pa. ... There wont be no more words said, if youfolks dont mind. The family is too cut up to listen and it wouldnt be no kindness to them.


Will stopped and, turning to Mrs. Tarleton, he said in a lower voice: I wonder couldnt you takeScarlett in the house, Mam? It aint right for her to be standin in the sun so long. And GrandmaFontaine dont look any too peart neither, meanin no disrespect,


Startled at the abrupt switching from the eulogy to herself, Scarlett went red with embarrassmentas all eyes turned toward her. Why should Will advertise her already obvious pregnancy? She gavehim a shamed indignant look, but Wills placid gaze bore her down.


Please, his look said. I know what Im doin.


Already he was the man of the house and, not wishing to make a scene, Scarlett turnedhelplessly to Mrs. Tarleton. That lady, suddenly diverted, as Will had intended, from thoughts ofSuellen to the always fascinating matter of breeding, be it animal or human, took Scarletts arm.


Come in the house, honey.


Her face took on a look of kind, absorbed interest and Scarlett suffered herself to be led throughthe crowd that gave way and made a narrow path for her. There was a sympathetic murmuring asshe passed and several hands went out to pat her comfortingly. When she came abreast GrandmaFontaine, the old lady put out a skinny claw and said: Give me your arm, child, and added with afierce glance at Sally and Young Miss: No, dont you come. I dont want you.


They passed slowly through the crowd which closed behind them and went up the shady pathtoward the house, Mrs. Tarletons eager helping hand so strong under Scarletts elbow that she wasalmost lifted from the ground at each step.


Now, why did Will do that? cried Scarlett heatedly, when they were out of earshot. Hepractically said: Look at her! Shes going to have a baby!


Well, sakes alive, you are, arent you? said Mrs. Tarleton. Will did right It was foolish ofyou to stand in the hot sun when you might have fainted and had a miscarriage.


Will wasnt bothered about her miscarrying, said Grandma, a little breathless as she laboredacross the front yard toward the steps. There was a grim, knowing smile on her face. Wills smart.


He didnt want either you or me, Beetrice, at the graveside. He was scared of what wed say and heknew this was the only way to get rid of us. ... And it was more than that. He didnt want Scarlettto hear the clods dropping on the coffin. And hes right. Just remember, Scarlett, as long as youdont hear that sound, folks arent actually dead to you. But once you hear it ... Well, its the mostdreadfully final sound in the world. ... Help me up the steps, child, and give me a hand, Beetrice.


Scarlett dont any more need your arm than she needs crutches and Im not so peart, as Will observed.


... Will knew you were your fathers pet and he didnt want to make it worse for you than italready was. He figured it wouldnt be so bad for your sisters. Suellen has her shame to sustain herand Carreen her God. But youve got nothing to sustain you, have you, child?


No, answered Scarlett, helping the old lady up the Steps, faintly surprised at the truth thatsounded in the reedy old voice. Ive never had anything to sustain meexcept Mother.


But when you lost her, you found you could stand alone, didnt you? Well, some folks cant.


Your pa was one. Wills right. Dont you grieve. He couldnt get along without Ellen and heshappier where he is. Just like Ill be happier when I join the Old Doctor.


She spoke without any desire for sympathy and the two gave her none. She spoke as briskly andnaturally as if her husband were alive and in Jonesboro and a short buggy ride would bring themtogether. Grandma was too old and had seen too much to fear death.


Butyou can stand alone too, said Scarlett.


Yes, but its powerful uncomfortable at times.


Look here, Grandma, interrupted Mrs. Tarleton, you ought not to talk to Scarlett like that.


Shes upset enough already. What with her trip down here and that tight dress and her grief and theheat, shes got enough to make her miscarry without your adding to it, talking grief and sorrow.


Gods nightgown! cried Scarlett in irritation. Im not upset! And Im not one of those sicklymiscarrying fools!


You never can tell, said Mrs. Tarleton omnisciently. I lost my first when I saw a bull gore oneof our darkies andyou remember my red mare, Nellie? Now, there was the healthiest-lookingmare you ever saw but she was nervous and high strung and if I didnt watch her, shed


Beatrice, hush, said Grandma. Scarlett wouldnt miscarry on a bet. Lets us sit here in thehall where its cool. Theres a nice draft through here. Now, you go fetch us a glass of buttermilk,Beetrice, if theres any in the kitchen. Or look in the pantry and see if theres any wine. I could dowith a glass. Well sit here till the folks come up to say good-by.


Scarlett ought to be in bed, insisted Mrs. Tarleton, running her eyes over her with the expertair of one who calculated a pregnancy to the last-minute of its length.


Get going, said Grandma, giving her a prod with her cane, and Mrs. Tarleton went toward thekitchen, throwing her hat carelessly on the sideboard and running her hands through her damp redhair.


Scarlett lay back in her chair and unbuttoned the two top buttons of her tight basque, it was cooland dim in the high-ceilinged hall and the vagrant draft that went from back to front of the housewas refreshing after the heat of the sun. She looked across the hall into the parlor where Gerald hadlain and, wrenching her thoughts from him, looked up at the portrait of Grandma Robillardhanging above the fireplace. The bayonet-scarred portrait with its high-piled hair, half-exposedbreasts and cool insolence had, as always, a tonic effect upon her.


I dont know which hit Beetrice Tarleton worse, losing her boys or her horses, said GrandmaFontaine. She never did pay much mind to Jim or her girls, you know. Shes one of those folksWill was talking about. Her mainsprings busted. Sometimes I wonder if she wont go the wayyour pa went. She wasnt ever happy unless horses or humans were breeding right in her face andnone of her girls are married or got any prospects of catching husbands in this county, so shes gotnothing to occupy her mind. If she wasnt such a lady at heart, shed be downright common. ...


Was Will telling the truth about marrying Suellen?


Yes, said Scarlett, looking the old lady full in the eye. Goodness, she could remember the timewhen she was scared to death of Grandma Fontaine! Well, shed grown up since then and shedjust as soon as not tell her to go to the devil if she meddled in affairs at Tara.


He could do better, said Grandma candidly.


Indeed? said Scarlett haughtily.


Come off your high horse, Miss, said the old lady tartly. I shant attack your precious sister,though I might have if Id stayed at the burying ground. What I mean is with the scarcity of men inthe neighborhood, Will could marry most any of the girls. Theres Beatrices four wild cats and theMunroe girls and the McRae


Hes going to marry Sue and thats that.


Shes lucky to get him.


Tara is lucky to get him.


You love this place, dont you?


Yes.


So much that you dont mind your sister marrying out of her class as long as you have a manaround to care for Tara?


Class? said Scarlett, startled at the idea. Class? What does class matter now, so long as a girlgets a husband who can take care of her?


Thats a debatable question, said Old Miss. Some folks would say you were talking commonsense. Others would say you were letting down bars that ought never be lowered one inch. Willscertainly not quality folks and some of your people were.


Her sharp old eyes went to the portrait of Grandma Robillard.


Scarlett thought of Will, lank, unimpressive, mild, eternally chewing a straw, his wholeappearance deceptively devoid of energy, like that of most Crackers. He did not have behind him along line of ancestors of wealth, prominence and blood. The first of Wills family to set foot onGeorgia soil might even have been one of Oglethorpes debtors or a bond servant. Will had notbeen to college. In fact, four years in a backwoods school was all the education he had ever had.


He was honest and he was loyal, he was patient and he was hard working, but certainly he was notquality. Undoubtedly by Robillard standards, Suellen was coming down in the world.


So you approve of Will coming into your family?


Yes, answered Scarlett fiercely, ready to pounce upon the old lady at the first words ofcondemnation.


You may kiss me, said Grandma surprisingly, and she smiled in her most approving manner.


I never liked you much till now, Scarlett. You were always hard as a hickory nut, even as a child,and I dont like hard females, barring myself. But I do like the way you meet things. You dontmake a fuss about things that cant be helped, even if they are disagreeable. You take your fencescleanly like a good hunter.


Scarlett smiled uncertainly and pecked obediently at the withered cheek presented to her. It waspleasant to hear approving words again, even if she had little idea what they meant.


Theres plenty of folks hereabouts wholl have something to say about you letting Sue marry aCrackerfor all that everybody likes Will. Theyll say in one breath what a fine man he is andhow terrible it is for an OHara girl to marry beneath her. But dont you let it bother you.


Ive never bothered about what people said.


So Ive heard. There was a hint of acid in the old voice. Well, dont bother about what folkssay. Itll probably be a very successful marriage. Of course, Wills always going to look like aCracker and marriage wont improve his grammar any. And, even if he makes a mint of money,hell never lend any shine and sparkle to Tara, like your father did. Crackers are short on sparkle.


But Wills a gentleman at heart. Hes got the right instincts. Nobody but a born gentleman couldhave put his finger on what is wrong with us as accurately as he just did, down there at theburying. The whole world cant lick us but we can lick ourselves by longing too hard for things wehavent got any moreand by remembering too much. Yes, Will will do well by Suellen and byTara.


Then you approve of me letting him marry her?


God, no! The old voice was tired and bitter but vigorous. Approve of Crackers marrying intoold families? Bah! Would I approve of breeding scrub stock to thoroughbreds? Oh, Crackers aregood and solid and honest but


But you said you thought it would be a successful match! cried Scarlett bewildered.


Oh, I think its good for Suellen to marry Willto marry anybody for that matter, because sheneeds a husband bad. And where else could she get one? And where else could you get as good amanager for Tara? But that doesnt mean I like the situation any better than you do.


But I do like it, thought Scarlett trying to grasp the old ladys meaning. Im glad Will is going tomarry her. Why should she think I minded? Shes taking it for granted that I do mind, just like her.


She felt puzzled and a little ashamed, as always when people attributed to her emotions andmotives they possessed and thought she shared.


Grandma fanned herself with her palmetto leaf and went on briskly: I dont approve of thematch any more than you do but Im practical and so are you. And when it comes to somethingthats unpleasant but cant be helped, I dont see any sense in screaming and kicking about it.


Thats no way to meet the ups and downs of life. I know because my family and the Old Doctorsfamily have had more than our share of ups and downs. And if we folks have a motto, its this:


Dont hollersmile and bide your time. Weve survived a passel of things that way, smiling andbiding our time, and weve gotten to be experts at surviving. We had to be. Weve always bet onthe wrong horses. Run out of France with the Huguenots, run out of England with the Cavaliers,run out of Scotland with Bonnie Prince Charlie, run out of Haiti by the niggers and now licked bythe Yankees. But we always turn up on top in a few years. You know why?


She cocked her head and Scarlett thought she looked like nothing so much as an old, knowingparrot.


No, I dont know, Im sure, she answered politely. But she was heartily bored, even as she hadbeen the day when Grandma launched on her memories of the Creek uprising.


Well, this is the reason. We bow to the inevitable. Were not wheat, were buckwheat! When astorm comes along it flattens ripe wheat because its dry and cant bend with the wind. But ripebuckwheats got sap in it and it bends. And when the wind has passed, it springs up almost asstraight and strong as before. We arent a stiff-necked tribe. Were mighty limber when a hardwinds blowing, because we know it pays to be limber. When trouble comes we bow to theinevitable without any mouthing, and we work and we smile and we bide our time. And we playalong with lesser folks and we take what we can get from them. And when were strong enough,we kick the folks whose necks weve climbed over. That, my child, is the secret of the survival.


And after a pause, she added: I pass it on to you.


The old lady cackled, as if she were amused by her words, despite the venom in them. Shelooked as if she expected some comment from Scarlett but the words had made little sense to herand she could think of nothing to say.


No, sir, Old Miss went on, our folks get flattened out but they rise up again, and thats more than I can say for plenty of people not so far away from here. Look at Cathleen Calvert. You cansee what shes come to. Poor white! And a heap lower than the man she married. Look at theMcRae family. Flat to the ground, helpless, dont know what to do, dont know how to doanything. Wont even try. They spend their time whining about the good old days. And look atwell, look at nearly anybody in this County except my Alex and my Sally and you and JimTarleton and his girls and some others. The rest have gone under because they didnt have any sapin them, because they didnt have the gumption to rise up again. There never was anything to thosefolks but money and darkies, and now that the money and darkies are gone, those folks will beCracker in another generation.


You forgot the Wilkes.


No, I didnt forget them. I just thought Id be polite and not mention them, seeing that Ashleysa guest under this roof. But seeing as how youve brought up their nameslook at them! TheresIndia who from all I hear is a dried-up old maid already, giving herself all kinds of widowed airsbecause Stu Tarleton was killed and not making any effort to forget him and try to catch anotherman. Of course, shes old but she could catch some widower with a big family if she tried. Andpoor Honey was always a man-crazy fool with no more sense than a guinea hen. And as forAshley, look at him!


Ashley is a very fine man, began Scarlett hotly.


I never said he wasnt but hes as helpless as a turtle on his back. If the Wilkes family pullsthrough these hard times, itll be Melly who pulls them through. Not Ashley.


Melly! Lord, Grandma! What are you talking about? Ive lived with Melly long enough toknow shes sickly and scared and hasnt the gumption to say Boo to a goose.


Now why on earth should anyone want to say Boo to a goose? It always sounded like a wasteof time to me. She might not say Boo to a goose but shed say Boo to the world or the Yankeegovernment or anything else that threatened her precious Ashley or her boy or her notions ofgentility. Her way isnt your way, Scarlett, or my way. Its the way your mother would have actedif shed lived. Melly puts me in mind of your mother when she was young. ... And maybe shellpull the Wilkes family through.


Oh, Mellys a well-meaning little ninny. But you are very unjust to Ashley. Hes


Oh, foot! Ashley was bred to read books and nothing else. That doesnt help a man pull himselfout of a tough fix, like were all in now. From what I hear, hes the worst plow hand in the County!


Now you just compare him with my Alex! Before the war, Alex was the most worthless dandy inthe world and he never had a thought beyond a new cravat and getting drunk and shootingsomebody and chasing girls who were no better than they should be. But look at him now! Helearned farming because he had to learn. Hed have starved and so would all of us. Now he raisesthe best cotton in the Countyyes, Miss! Its a heap better than Tara cotton!and he knows whatto do with hogs and chickens. Ha! Hes a fine boy for all his bad temper. He knows how to bide histime and change with changing ways and when all this Reconstruction misery is over, youre goingto see my Alex as rich a man as his father and his grandfather were. But Ashley


Scarlett was smarting at the slight to Ashley.


It all sounds like tootle to me, she said coldly.


Well, it shouldnt, said Grandma, fastening a sharp eye upon her. For its just exactly thecourse youve been following since you went to Atlanta. Oh, yes! We hear of your didoes, even ifwe are buried down here in the country. Youve changed with the changing times too. We hear howyou suck up to the Yankees and the white trash and the new-rich Carpetbaggers to get money outof them. Butter doesnt melt in your mouth from all I can hear. Well, go to it, I say. And get everycent out of them you can, but when youve got enough money, kick them in the face, because theycant serve you any longer. Be sure you do that and do it properly, for trash hanging onto your coattails can ruin you.


Scarlett looked at her, her brow wrinkling with the effort to digest the words. They still didntmake much sense and she was still angry at Ashley being called a turtle on his back.


I think youre wrong about Ashley, she said abruptly.


Scarlett, you just arent smart.


Thats your opinion, said Scarlett rudely, wishing it were permissible to smack old ladies


jaws.


Oh, youre smart enough about dollars and cents. Thats a mans way of being smart. But youarent smart at all like a woman. You arent a speck smart about folks.


Scarletts eyes began to snap fire and her hands to clench and unclench.


Ive made you good and mad, havent I? asked the old lady, smiling. Well, I aimed to do justthat.


Oh, you did, did you? And why, pray?


I had good and plenty reasons.


Grandma sank back in her chair and Scarlett suddenly realized that she looked very tired andincredibly old. The tiny clawlike hands folded over the fan were yellow and waxy as a deadpersons. The anger went out of Scarletts heart as a thought came to her. She leaned over and tookone of the hands in hers.


Youre a mighty sweet old liar, she said. You didnt mean a word of all this rigmarole.


Youve just been talking to keep my mind off Pa, havent you?


Dont fiddle with me! said Old Miss grumpily, Jerking away her hand. Partly for that reason,partly because what Ive been telling you is the truth and youre just too stupid to realize it.


But she smiled a little and took the sting from her words. Scarletts heart emptied itself of wrathabout Ashley. It was nice to know Grandma hadnt meant any of it.


Thank you, just the same. It was nice of you to talk to meand Im glad to know youre withme about Will and Suellen, even ifeven if a lot of other people do disapprove.


Mrs. Tarleton came down the hall, carrying two glasses of buttermilk. She did all domesticthings badly and the glasses were slopping over.


I had to go clear to the spring house to get it, she said. Drink it quick because the folks are coming up from the burying ground. Scarlett, are you really going to let Suellen marry Will? Notthat he isnt a sight too good for her but you know he is a Cracker and


Scarletts eyes met those of Grandma. There was a wicked sparkle in the old eyes that found ananswer in her own.