Chapter 60


SOMETHING WAS WRONG with the world, a somber, frightening wrongness that pervadedeverything like a dark impenetrable mist, stealthily closing around Scarlett. This wrongness wenteven deeper than Bonnies death, for now the first unbearable anguish was fading into resigned acceptanceof her loss. Yet this eerie sense of disaster to come persisted, as though something blackand hooded stood just at her shoulder, as though the ground beneath her feet might turn toquicksand as she trod upon it.


She had never before known this type of fear. All her life her feet had been firmly planted incommon sense and the only things she had ever feared had been the things she could see, injury,hunger, poverty, loss of Ashleys love. Unanalytical she was trying to analyze now and with nosuccess. She had lost her dearest child but she could stand that, somehow, as she had stood othercrushing losses. She had her health, she had as much money as she could wish and she still hadAshley, though she saw less and less of him these days. Even the constraint which had beenbetween them since the day of Melanies ill-starred surprise party did not worry her, for she knewit would pass. No, her fear was not of pain or hunger or loss of love.


Those fears had neverweighed her down as this feeling of wrongness was doingthis blighting fear that was oddly likethat which she knew in her old nightmare, a thick, swimming mist through which she ran withbursting heart, a lost child seeking a haven that was hidden from her.


She remembered how Rhett had always been able to laugh her out of her fears. She rememberedthe comfort of his broad brown chest and his strong arms. And so she turned to him with eyes thatreally saw him for the first time in weeks. And the change she saw shocked her. This man was notgoing to laugh, nor was he going to comfort her.


For some time after Bonnies death she had been too angry with him, too preoccupied with hergrief to do more than speak politely in front of the servants. She had been too busyreme(own) mbering the swift running patter of Bonnies feet and her bubbling laugh to think that he, too,might be remembering and with pain even greater than her own. Throughout these weeks they hadmet and spoken as courteously as strangers meeting in the impersonal walls of a hotel, sharing thesame roof, the same table, but never sharing the thoughts of each other.


Now that she was frightened and lonely, she would have broken through this barrier if she could, but she found that he was holding her at arms length, as though he wished to have no words withher that went beneath the surface. Now that her anger was fading she wanted to tell him that sheheld him guiltless of Bonnies death. She wanted to cry in his arms and say that she, too, had beenoverly proud of the childs horsemanship, overly indulgent to her wheedlings. Now she wouldwillingly have humbled herself and admitted that she had only hurled that accusation at him out ofher misery, hoping by hurting him to alleviate her own hurt. But there never seemed an opportunemoment. He looked at her out of black blank eyes that made no opportunity for her to speak. Andapologies, once postponed, became harder and harder to make, and finally impossible.


She wondered why this should be. Rhett was her husband and between them there was theunbreakable bond of two people who have shared the same bed, begotten and borne a loved childand seen that child, too soon, laid away in the dark. Only in the arms of the father of that childcould she find comfort, in the exchange of memories and grief that might hurt at first but wouldhelp to heal. But, now, as matters stood between them, she would as soon go to the arms of acomplete stranger.


He was seldom at home. When they did sit down to supper together, he was usually drunk. Hewas not drinking as he had formerly, becoming increasingly more polished and biting as the liquortook hold of him, saving amusing, malicious things that made her laugh in spite of herself. Now hewas silently, morosely drunk and, as the evenings progressed, soddenly drunk. Sometimes, in theearly hours of the dawn, she heard him ride into the back yard and beat on the door of the servants


house so that Pork might help him up the back stairs and put him to bed. Put him to bed! Rhettwho had always drunk others under the table without turning a hair and then put them to bed.


He was untidy now, where once he had been well groomed, and it took all Porks scandalizedarguing even to make him change his linen before supper. Whisky was showing in his face and thehard line of his long jaw was being obscured under an unhealthy bloat and puffs rising under hisbloodshot eyes. His big body with its hard swelling muscles looked soft and slack and his waistline began to thicken.


Often he did not come home at all or even send word that he would be away overnight. Ofcourse, he might be snoring drunkenly in some room above a saloon, but Scarlett always believedthat he was at Belle Watlings house on these occasions. Once she had seen Belle in a store, acoarse overblown woman now, with most of her good looks gone. But, for all her paint and flashydomes, she was buxom and almost motherly looking. Instead of dropping her eyes or glaringdefiantly, as did other light women when confronted by ladies, Belle gave her stare for stare,searching her face with an intent, almost pitying look that brought a flush to Scarletts cheek.


But she could not accuse him now, could not rage at him, demand fidelity or try to shame him,any more than she could bring herself to apologize for accusing him of Bonnies death. She wasclutched by a bewildered apathy, an unhappiness that she could not understand, an unhappinessthat went deeper than anything she had ever known. She was lonely and she could never rememberbeing so lonely before. Perhaps she had never had the time to be very lonely until now. She waslonely and afraid and there was no one to whom she could turn, no one except Melanie. For now,even Mammy, her mainstay, had gone back to Tara. Gone permanently.


Mammy gave no explanation for her departure. Her tired old eyes looked sadly at Scarlett when she asked for the train fare home. To Scarletts tears and pleading that she stay, Mammy onlyanswered: Look ter me lak Miss Ellen say ter me: Mammy, come home. Yo wuk done finish. SoAhs gwine home.


Rhett, who had listened to the talk, gave Mammy the money and patted her arm.


Youre right, Mammy. Miss Ellen is right. Your work here is done. Go home. Let me know ifyou ever need anything. And as Scarlett broke into renewed indignant commands: Hush, youfool! Let her go! Why should anyone want to stay in this housenow?


There was such a savage bright glitter in his eyes when he spoke that Scarlett shrank from him,frightened.


Dr. Meade, do you think he cancan have lost his mind? she questioned afterwards, driven tothe doctor by her own sense of helplessness.


No, said the doctor, but hes drinking like a fish and will kill himself if he keeps it up. Heloved the child, Scarlett, and I guess he drinks to forget about her. Now, my advice to you, Miss, isto give him another baby just as quickly as you can.


Hah! thought Scarlett bitterly, as she left his office. That was easier said than done. She wouldgladly have another child, several children, if they would take that look out of Rhetts eyes and fillup the aching spaces in her own heart. A boy who had Rhetts dark handsomeness and another littlegirl. Oh, for another girl, pretty and gay and willful and full of laughter, not like the giddy-brainedElla. Why, oh, why couldnt God have taken Ella if He had to take one of her children? Ella was nocomfort to her, now that Bonnie was gone. But Rhett did not seem to want any other children. Atleast he never came to her bedroom, though now the door was never locked and usually invitinglyajar. He did not seem to care. He did not seem to care for anything now except whisky and thatblowzy red-haired woman.


He was bitter now, where he had been pleasantly jeering, brutal where his thrusts had once beentempered with humor. After Bonnie died, many of the good ladies of the neighborhood who hadbeen won over to him by his charming manners with his daughter were anxious to show himkindness. They stopped him on the street to give him their sympathy and spoke to him from overtheir hedges, saying that they understood. But now that Bonnie, the reason for his good manners,was gone the manners went to. He cut the ladies and their well-meant condolences off shortly,rudely.


But, oddly enough, the ladies were not offended. They understood, or thought they understood.


When he rode home in the twilight almost too drunk to stay in the saddle, scowling at those whospoke to him, the ladies said Poor thing! and redoubled their efforts to be kind and gentle. Theyfelt very sorry for him, broken hearted and riding home to no better comfort than ScarlettEverybody knew how cold and heartless she was. Everybody was appalled at the seeming easewith which she had recovered from Bonnies death, never realizing or caring to realize the effortthat lay behind that seeming recovery. Rhett had the towns tenderest sympathy and he neitherknew nor cared. Scarlett had the towns dislike and, for once, she would have welcomed thesympathy of old friends.


Now, none of her old friends came to the house, except Aunt Pitty, Melanie and Ashley. Only the new friends came calling in their shining carriages, anxious to tell her of their sympathy, eager todivert her with gossip about other new friends in whom she was not at all interested. All thesenew people, strangers, every one! They didnt know her. They would never know her. They hadno realization of what her life had been before she reached her present safe eminence in hermansion on Peachtree Street. They didnt care to talk about what their lives had been before theyattained stiff brocades and victorias with fine teams of horses. They didnt know of her struggles,her privations, all the things that made this great house and pretty clothes and silver and receptionsworth having. They didnt know.


They didnt care, these people from God-knows-where whoseemed to live always on the surface of things, who had no common memories of war and hungerand fighting, who had no common roots going down into the same red earth.


Now in her loneliness, she would have liked to while away the afternoons with Maybelle orFanny or Mrs. El-sing or Mrs. Whiting or even that redoubtable old warrior, Mrs. Merriwether. OrMrs. Bonnell oror any of her old friends and neighbors. For they knew. They had known warand terror and fire, had seen dear ones dead before their time; they had hungered and been ragged,had lived with the wolf at the door. And they had rebuilt fortune from ruin.


It would be a comfort to sit with Maybelle, remembering that Maybelle had buried a baby, deadin the mad flight before Sherman. There would be solace in Fannys presence, knowing that sheand Fanny both had lost husbands in the black days of martial law. It would be grim fun to laughwith Mrs. Elsing, recalling the old ladys face as she flogged her horse through Five Points the dayAtlanta fell, her loot from the commissary jouncing from her carriage. It would be pleasant tomatch stories with Mrs. Merriwether, now secure on the proceeds of her bakery, pleasant to say:


Do you remember how bad things were right after the surrender? Do you remember when wedidnt know where our next pair of shoes was coming from? And look at us now!


Yes, it would be pleasant. Now she understood why when two ex-Confederates met, they talkedof the war with so much relish, with pride, with nostalgia. Those had been days that tried theirhearts but they had come through them. They were veterans. She was a veteran too, but she had nocronies with whom she could refight old battles. Oh, to be with her own kind of people again,those people who had been through the same things and knew how they hurtand yet how great apart of you they were!


But, somehow, these people had slipped away. She realized that it was her own fault. She hadnever cared until nownow that Bonnie was dead and she was lonely and afraid and she sawacross her shining dinner table a swarthy sodden stranger disintegrating under her eyes.