Chapter 13


UNDER MRS. MERRIWETHERS GOADING, Dr. Meade took action, in the form of a letter tothe newspaper wherein be did not mention Rhett by name, though his meaning was obvious. Theeditor, sensing the social drama of the letter, put it on the second page of the paper, in itself astartling innovation, as the first two pages of the paper were always devoted to advertisements ofslaves, mules, plows, coffins, houses for sale or rent, cures for private diseases, abortifacients andrestoratives for lost manhood.


The doctors letter was the first of a chorus of indignation that was beginning to be heard allover the South against speculators, profiteers and holders of government contracts. Conditions inWilmington, the chief blockade port, now that Charlestons port was practically sealed by theYankee gunboats, had reached the proportions of an open scandal. Speculators swarmedWilmington and, having the ready cash, bought up boatloads of goods and held them for a rise inprices. The rise always came, for with the increasing scarcity of necessities, prices leaped higherby the month. The civilian population had either to do without or buy at the speculators prices,and the poor and those in moderate circumstances were suffering increasing hardships. With therise in prices, Confederate money sank, and with its rapid fall there rose a wild passion forluxuries. Blockaders were commissioned to bring in necessities but now it was the higher-pricedluxuries that filled their boats to the exclusion of the things the Confederacy vitally needed.


Peoplefrenziedly bought these luxuries with the money they had today, fearing that tomorrows priceswould be higher and the money worthless.


To make matters worse, there was only one railroad line from Wilmington to Richmond and,while thousands of barrels of flour and boxes of bacon spoiled and rotted in wayside stations forwant of transportation, speculators with wines, taffetas and coffee to sell seemed always able to gettheir goods to Richmond two days after they were landed at Wilmington.


The rumor which had been creeping about underground was now being openly discussed, thatRhett Butler not only ran his own four boats and sold the cargoes at unheard-of prices but boughtup the cargoes of other boats and held them for rises in prices. It was said that he was at the headof a combine worth more than a million dollars, with Wilmington as its headquarters for the purposeof buying blockade goods on the docks. They had dozens of warehouses in that city and inRichmond, so the story ran, and the warehouses were crammed with food and clothing that werebeing held for higher prices. Already soldiers and civilians alike were feeling the pinch, and themuttering against him and his fellow speculators was bitter.


There are many brave and patriotic men in the blockade arm of the Confederacys navalservice, ran the last of the doctors letter, unselfish men who are risking their lives and all theirwealth that the Confederacy may survive. They are enshrined in the hearts of all loyal Southerners,and no one begrudges them the scant monetary returns they make for their risks. They are unselfishgentlemen, and we honor them. Of these men, I do not speak.


But there are other scoundrels who masquerade under the cloak of the blockader for their ownselfish gains, and I call down the just wrath and vengeance of an embattled people, fighting in thejustest of Causes, on these human vultures who bring in satins and laces when our men are dyingfor want of quinine, who load their boats with tea and wines when our heroes are writhing for lack of morphia. I execrate these vampires who are sucking the lifeblood of the men who follow RobertLeethese men who are making the very name of blockader a stench in the nostrils of all patrioticmen. How can we endure these scavengers in our midst with their varnished boots when our boysare tramping barefoot into battle? How can we tolerate them with their champagnes and their patesof Strasbourg when our soldiers are shivering about their camp fires and gnawing moldy bacon? Icall upon every loyal Confederate to cast them out.


Atlanta read, knew the oracle had spoken, and, as loyal Confederates, they hastened to castRhett out.


Of all the homes which had received him in the fall of 1862, Miss Pittypats was almost the onlyone into which he could enter in 1863. And, except for Melanie, he probably would not have beenreceived there. Aunt Pitty was in a state whenever he was in town. She knew very well what herfriends were saying when she permitted him to call but she still lacked the courage to tell him hewas unwelcome. Each time he arrived in Atlanta, she set her fat mouth and told the girls that shewould meet him at the door and forbid him to enter. And each time he came, a little package in hishand and a compliment for her charm and beauty on his lips, she wilted.


I just dont know what to do, she would moan. He just looks at me and IIm scared todeath of what he would do if I told him. Hes got such a bad reputation. Do you suppose he wouldstrike meoror Oh, dear, if Charlie were only alive! Scarlett, you must tell him not to callagaintell him in a nice way. Oh, me! I do believe you encourage him, and the whole town istalking and, if your mother ever finds out, what will she say to me? Melly, you must not be so niceto him. Be cool and distant and he will understand. Oh, Melly, do you think Id better write Henrya note and ask him to speak to Captain Butler?


No, I dont, said Melanie. And I wont be rude to him, either. I think people are acting likechickens with their heads off about Captain Butler. Im sure he cant be all the bad things Dr.


Meade and Mrs. Merriwether say he is. He wouldnt hold food from starving people. Why, he evengave me a hundred dollars for the orphans. Im sure hes just as loyal and patriotic as any of us andhes just too proud to defend himself. You know how obstinate men are when they get their backsup.


Aunt Pitty knew nothing about men, either with their backs up or otherwise, and she could onlywave her fat little hands helplessly. As for Scarlett, she had long ago become resigned to Melanieshabit of seeing good in everyone. Melanie was a fool, but there was nothing anybody could doabout it.


Scarlett knew that Rhett was not being patriotic and, though she would have died rather thanconfess it, she did not care. The little presents he brought her from Nassau, little oddments that alady could accept with propriety, were what mattered most to her. With prices as high as they were,where on earth could she get needles and bonbons and hairpins, if she forbade the house to him?


No, it was easier to shift the responsibility to Aunt Pitty, who after all was the head of the house,the chaperon and the arbiter of morals. Scarlett knew the town gossiped about Rhetts calls, andabout her too; but she also knew that in the eyes of Atlanta Melanie Wilkes could do no wrong, andif Melanie defended Rhett his calls were still tinged with respectability.


However, life would be pleasanter if Rhett would recant his heresies. She wouldnt have to suffer the embarrassment of seeing him cut openly when she walked down Peachtree Street withhim.


Even if you think such things, why do you say them? she scolded. If youd just think whatyou please but keep your mouth shut, everything would be so much nicer.


Thats your system, isnt it, my green-eyed hypocrite? Scarlett, Scarlett! I hoped for morecourageous conduct from you. I thought the Irish said what they thought and the Divvil take thehindermost. Tell me truthfully, dont you sometimes almost burst from keeping your mouth shut?


Wellyes, Scarlett confessed reluctantly. I do get awfully bored when they talk about theCause, morning, noon and night. But goodness, Rhett Butler, if I admitted it nobody would speakto me and none of the boys would dance with me!


Ah, yes, and one must be danced with, at all costs. Well, I admire your self-control but I do notfind myself equal to it. Nor can I masquerade in a cloak of romance and patriotism, no matter howconvenient it might be. There are enough stupid patriots who are risking every cent they have inthe blockade and who are going to come out of this war paupers. They dont need me among theirnumber, either to brighten the record of patriotism or to increase the roll of paupers, Let them havethe haloes. They deserve themfor once I am being sincereand, besides, haloes will be about allthey will have in a year or so.


I think you are very nasty to even hint such things when you know very well that England andFrance are coming in on our side in no time and


Why, Scarlett! You must have been reading a newspaper! Im surprised at you. Dont do itagain. It addles womens brains. For your information, I was in England, not a month ago, and Illtell you this. England will never help the Confederacy. England never bets on the underdog. Thatswhy shes England. Besides, the fat Dutch woman who is sitting on the throne is a God-fearingsoul and she doesnt approve of slavery. Let the English mill workers starve because they cant getour cotton but never, never strike a blow for slavery. And as for France, that weak imitation ofNapoleon is far too busy establishing the French in Mexico to be bothered with us. In fact hewelcomes this war, because it keeps us too busy to run his troops out of Mexico. ... No, Scarlett,the idea of assistance from abroad is just a newspaper invention to keep up the morale of theSouth. The Confederacy is doomed.


Its living on its hump now, like the camel, and even thelargest of humps arent inexhaustible. I give myself about six months more of blockading and thenIm through. After that, it will be too risky. And Ill sell my boats to some foolish Englishman whothinks he can slip them through. But one way or the other, its not bothering me. Ive made moneyenough, and its in English banks and in gold. None of this worthless paper for me.


As always when he spoke, he sounded so plausible. Other people might call his utterancestreachery but, to Scarlett, they always rang with common sense and truth. And she knew that thiswas utterly wrong, knew she should be shocked and infuriated. Actually she was neither, but shecould pretend to be. It made her feel more respectable and ladylike.


I think what Dr. Meade wrote about was right, Captain Butler. The only way to redeem yourselfis to enlist after you sell your boats. Youre a West Pointer and


You talk like a Baptist preacher making a recruiting speech. Suppose I dont want to redeem myself? Why should I fight to uphold the system that cast me out? I shall take pleasure in seeing itsmashed.


I never heard of any system, she said crossly.


No? And yet you are a part of it, like I was, and Ill wager you dont like it any more than I did.


Well, why am I the black sheep of the Butler family? For this reason and no otherI didntconform to Charleston and I couldnt. And Charleston is the South, only intensified. I wonder ifyou realize yet what a bore it is? So many things that one must do because theyve always beendone. So many things, quite harmless, that one must not do for the same reason. So many thingsthat annoyed me by their senselessness. Not marrying the young lady, of whom you have probablyheard, was merely the last straw. Why should I marry a boring fool, simply because an accidentprevented me from getting her home before dark? And why permit her wild-eyed brother to shootand kill me, when I could shoot straighter? If I had been a gentleman, of course, I would have lethim kill me and that would have wiped the blot from the Butler escutcheon. ButI like to live.


And so Ive lived and Ive had a good time. ... When I think of my brother, living among the sacredcows of Charleston, and most reverent toward them, and remember his stodgy wife and his SaintCecilia Balls and his everlasting rice fieldsthen I know the compensation for breaking with thesystem. Scarlett, our Southern way of living is as antiquated as the feudal system of the MiddleAges. The wonder is that its lasted as long as it has. It had to go and its going now. And yet youexpect me to listen to orators like Dr. Meade who tell me our Cause is just and holy? And get soexcited by the roll of drums that Ill grab a musket and rush off to Virginia to shed my blood forMarse Robert? What kind of a fool do you think I am? Kissing the rod that chastised me is not inmy line. The South and I are even now.


The South threw me out to starve once. I havent starved,and I am making enough money out of the Souths death throes to compensate me for my lostbirthright.


I think you are vile and mercenary, said Scarlett, but her remark was automatic. Most of whathe was saying went over her head, as did any conversation that was not personal. But part of itmade sense. There were such a lot of foolish things about life among nice people. Having topretend that her heart was in the grave when it wasnt. And how shocked everybody had beenwhen she danced at the bazaar. And the infuriating way people lifted their eyebrows every time shedid or said anything the least bit different from what every other young woman did and said. Butstill, she was jarred at hearing him attack the very traditions that irked her most. She had lived toolong among people who dissembled politely not to feel disturbed at hearing her own thoughts putinto words.


Mercenary? No, Im only farsighted. Though perhaps that is merely a synonym for mercenary.


At least, people who were not as farsighted as I will call it that. Any loyal Confederate who had athousand dollars in cash in 1861 could have done what I did, but how few were mercenary enoughto take advantage of their opportunities! As for instance, right after Fort Sumter fell and before theblockade was established, I bought up several thousand bales of cotton at dirt-cheap prices and ranthem to England. They are still there in warehouses in Liverpool. Ive never sold them. Imholding them until the English mills have to have cotton and will give me any price I ask. Iwouldnt be surprised if I got a dollar a pound.


Youll get a dollar a pound when elephants roost in trees!


Ill believe Ill get it. Cotton is at seventy-two cents a pound already. Im going to be a richman when this war is over, Scarlett, because I was farsightedpardon me, mercenary. I told youonce before that there were two times for making big money, one in the upbuilding of a countryand the other in its destruction. Slow money on the upbuilding, fast money in the crack-up.


Remember my words. Perhaps they may be of use to you some day.


I do appreciate good advice so much, said Scarlett, with all the sarcasm she could muster.


But I dont need your advice. Do you think Pa is a pauper? Hes got all the money Ill ever needand then I have Charles property besides.


I imagine the French aristocrats thought practically the same thing until the very moment whenthey climbed into the tumbrils.


Frequently Rhett pointed out to Scarlett the inconsistency of her wearing black mourning clotheswhen she was participating in all social activities. He liked bright colors and Scarletts funeraldresses and the crêpe veil that hung from her bonnet to her heels both amused him and offendedhim. But she clung to her dull black dresses and her veil, knowing that if she changed them forcolors without waiting several more years, the town would buzz even more than it was alreadybuzzing. And besides, how would she ever explain to her mother?


Rhett said frankly that the crêpe veil made her look like a crow and the black dresses added tenyears to her age. This ungallant statement sent her flying to the mirror to see if she really did looktwenty-eight instead of eighteen.


I should think youd have more pride than to try to look like Mrs. Merriwether, he taunted.


And better taste than to wear that veil to advertise a grief Im sure you never felt. Ill lay a wagerwith you. Ill have that bonnet and veil off your head and a Paris creation on it within twomonths.


Indeed, no, and dont lets discuss it any further, said Scarlett, annoyed by his reference toCharles. Rhett, who was preparing to leave for Wilmington for another trip abroad, departed with agrin on his face.


One bright summer morning some weeks later, he reappeared with a brightly trimmed hatbox inhis hand and, after finding that Scarlett was alone in the house, he opened it. Wrapped in layers oftissue was a bonnet, a creation that made her cry: Oh, the darling thing! as she reached for it.


Starved for the sight, much less the touch, of new clothes, it seemed the loveliest bonnet she hadever seen. It was of dark-green taffeta, lined with water silk of a pale-jade color. The ribbons thattied under the chin were as wide as her hand and they, too, were pale green. And, curled about thebrim of this confection was the perkiest of green ostrich plumes.


Put it on, said Rhett, smiling.


She flew across the room to the mirror and plopped it on her head, pushing back her hair toshow her earrings and tying the ribbon under her chin.


How do I look? she cried, pirouetting for his benefit and tossing her head so that the plumedanced. But she knew she looked pretty even before she saw confirmation in his eyes. She looked attractively saucy and the green of the lining made her eyes dark emerald and sparkling.


Oh, Rhett, whose bonnet is it? Ill buy it. Ill give you every cent Ive got for it.


Its your bonnet, he said. Who else could wear that shade of green? Dont you think I carriedthe color of your eyes well in my mind?


Did you really have it trimmed just for me?


Yes, and theres Rue de la Paix on the box, if that means anything to you.


It meant nothing to her, smiling at her reflection in the mirror. Just at this moment, nothingmattered to her except that she looked utterly charming in the first pretty hat she had put on herhead in two years. What she couldnt do with this hat! And then her smile faded.


Dont you like it?


Oh, its a dream but Oh, I do hate to have to cover this lovely green with crêpe and dye thefeather black.


He was beside her quickly and his deft fingers untied the wide bow under her chin. In a momentthe hat was back in its box.


What are you doing? You said it was mine.


But not to change to a mourning bonnet. I shall find some other charming lady with green eyeswho appreciates my taste.


Oh, you shant! Ill die if I dont have it! Oh, please, Rhett, dont be mean! Let me have it.


And turn it into a fright like your other hats? No.


She clutched at the box. That sweet thing that made her look so young and enchanting to begiven to some other girl? Oh, never! For a moment she thought of the horror of Pitty and Melanie.


She thought of Ellen and what she would say, and she shivered. But vanity was stronger.


I wont change it. I promise. Now, do let me have it.


He gave her the box with a slightly sardonic smile and watched her while she put it on again andpreened herself.


How much is it? she asked suddenly, her face falling. I have only fifty dollars but next month


It would cost about two thousand dollars, Confederate money, he said with a grin at herwoebegone expression.


Oh, dear Well, suppose I give you the fifty now and then when I get


I dont want any money for it, he said, Its a gift. Scarletts mouth dropped open. The linewas so closely, so carefully drawn where gifts from men were concerned.


Candy and flowers, dear, Ellen had said time and again, and perhaps a book of poetry or analbum or a small bottle of Florida water are the only things a lady may accept from a gentleman.


Never, never any expensive gift, even from your fiancé. And never any gift of jewelry or wearingapparel, not even gloves or handkerchiefs. Should you accept such gifts, men would know you were no lady and would try to take liberties.


Oh, dear, thought Scarlett, looking first at herself in the mirror and then at Rhetts unreadableface. I simply cant tell him I wont accept it. Its too darling. IdId almost rather he took aliberty, if it was a very small one. Then she was horrified at herself for having such a thought andshe turned pink.


IllIll give you the fifty dollars


If you do I will throw it in the gutter. Or, better still buy masses for your soul. Im sure yoursoul could do with a few masses.


She laughed unwillingly, and the laughing reflection under the green brim decided her instantly.


Whatever are you trying to do to me?


Im tempting you with fine gifts until your girlish ideals are quite worn away and you are at mymercy, he said.  Accept only candy and flowers from gentlemen, dearie,  he mimicked, andshe burst into a giggle.


You are a clever, black-hearted wretch, Rhett Butler, and you know very well this bonnets toopretty to be refused.


His eyes mocked her, even while they complimented her beauty.


Of course, you can tell Miss Pitty that you gave me a sample of taffeta and green silk and drewa picture of the bonnet and I extorted fifty dollars from you for it.


No. I shall say one hundred dollars and shell tell everybody in town and everybody will begreen with envy and talk about my extravagance. But Rhett, you mustnt bring me anything else soexpensive. Its awfully kind of you, but I really couldnt accept anything else.


Indeed? Well, I shall bring you presents so long as it pleases me and so long as I see things thatwill enhance your charms. I shall bring you dark-green watered silk for a frock to match thebonnet. And I warn you that I am not kind. I am tempting you with bonnets and bangles andleading you into a pit. Always remember I never do anything without reason and I never giveanything without expecting something in return. I always get paid.


His black eyes sought her face and traveled to her lips. Scarlett cast down her eyes, excitementfilling her. Now, he was going to try to take liberties, just as Ellen predicted. He was going to kissher, or try to kiss her, and she couldnt quite make up her flurried mind which it should be. If sherefused, he might jerk the bonnet right off her head and give it to some other girl. On the otherhand, if she permitted one chaste peck, he might bring her other lovely presents in the hope ofgetting another kiss. Men set such a store by kisses, though Heaven alone knew why. And lots oftimes, after one kiss they fell completely in love with a girl and made most entertaining spectaclesof themselves, provided the girl was clever and withheld her kisses after the first one.


It would beexciting to have Rhett Butler in love with her and admitting it and begging for a kiss or a smile.


Yes, she would let him kiss her.


But he made no move to kiss her. She gave him a sidelong glance from under her lashes andmurmured encouragingly.


So you always get paid, do you? And what do you expect to get from me?


That remains to be seen.


Well, if you think Ill marry you to pay for the bonnet, I wont, she said daringly and gave herhead a saucy flirt that set the plume to bobbing.


His white teeth gleamed under his little mustache.


Madam, you flatter yourself, I do not want to marry you or anyone else. I am not a marryingman.


Indeed! she cried, taken aback and now determined that he should take some liberty. I donteven intend to kiss you, either.


Then why is your mouth all pursed up in that ridiculous way?


Oh! she cried as she caught a glimpse of herself and saw that her red lips were indeed in theproper pose for a kiss. Oh! she cried again, losing her temper and stamping her foot. You arethe horridest man I have ever seen and I dont care if I never lay eyes on you again!


If you really felt that way, youd stamp on the bonnet. My, what a passion you are in and itsquite becoming, as you probably know. Come, Scarlett, stamp on the bonnet to show me what youthink of me and my presents.


Dont you dare touch this bonnet, she said, clutching it by the bow and retreating. He cameafter her, laughing softly and took her hands in his.


Oh, Scarlett, you are so young you wring my heart, he said. And I shall kiss you, as youseem to expect it, and leaning down carelessly, his mustache just grazed her cheek. Now, do youfeel that you must slap me to preserve the proprieties?


Her lips mutinous, she looked up into his eyes and saw so much amusement in their dark depthsthat she burst into laughter. What a tease he was and how exasperating! If he didnt want to marryher and didnt even want to kiss her, what did he want? If he wasnt in love with her, why did hecall so often and bring her presents?


Thats better, he said. Scarlett, Im a bad influence on you and if you have any sense you willsend me packingif you can. Im very hard to get rid of. But Im bad for you.


Are you?


Cant you see it? Ever since I met you at the bazaar, your career has been most shocking andIm to blame for most of it. Who encouraged you to dance? Who forced you to admit that youthought our glorious Cause was neither glorious nor sacred? Who goaded you into admitting thatyou thought men were fools to die for high-sounding principles? Who has aided you in giving theold ladies plenty to gossip about? Who is getting you out of mourning several years too soon? Andwho, to end all this, has lured you into accepting a gift which no lady can accept and still remain alady?


You flatter yourself, Captain Butler. I havent done anything so scandalous and Id have doneeverything you mentioned without your aid anyway.


I doubt that, he said and his face went suddenly quiet and somber. Youd still be the brokenheartedwidow of Charles Hamilton and famed for your good deeds among the wounded.


Eventually, however


But she was not listening, for she was regarding herself pleasedly in the mirror again, thinkingshe would wear the bonnet to the hospital this very afternoon and take flowers to the convalescentofficers.


That there was truth in his last words did not occur to her. She did not see that Rhett had priedopen the prison of her widowhood and set her free to queen it over unmarried girls when her daysas a belle should have been long past. Nor did she see that under his influence she had come a longway from Ellens teachings. The change had been so gradual, the flouting of one small conventionseeming to have no connection with the flouting of another, and none of them any connection withRhett. She did not realize that, with his encouragement, she had disregarded many of the sternestinjunctions of her mother concerning the proprieties, forgotten the difficult lessons in being a lady.


She only saw that the bonnet was the most becoming one she ever had, that it had not cost her apenny and that Rhett must be in love with her, whether he admitted it or not. And she certainlyintended to find a way to make him admit it.


The next day, Scarlett was standing in front of the mirror with a comb in her hand and her mouthfull of hairpins, attempting a new coiffure which Maybelle, fresh from a visit to her husband inRichmond, had said was the rage at the Capital. It was called Cats, Rats and Mice and presentedmany difficulties. The hair was parted in the middle and arranged in three rolls of graduating sizeon each side of the head, the largest, nearest the part, being the cat. The cat and the rat wereeasy to fix but the mice kept slipping out of her hairpins in an exasperating manner. However,she was determined to accomplish it, for Rhett was coming to supper and he always noticed andcommented upon any innovation of dress or hair.


As she struggled with her bushy, obstinate locks, perspiration beading her forehead, she heardlight running feet in the downstairs hall and knew that Melanie was home from the hospital. As sheheard her fly up the stairs, two at a time, she paused, hairpin in mid-air, realizing that somethingmust be wrong, for Melanie always moved as decorously as a dowager. She went to the door andthrew it open, and Melanie ran in, her face flushed and frightened, looking like a guilty child.


There were tears on her cheeks, her bonnet was hanging on her neck by the ribbons and herhoops swaying violently. She was clutching something in her hand, and the reek of heavy cheapperfume came into the room with her.


Oh, Scarlett! she cried, shutting the door and sinking on the bed. Is Auntie home yet? Sheisnt? Oh, thank the Lord! Scarlett, Im so mortified I could die! I nearly swooned and, Scarlett,Uncle Peter is threatening to tell Aunt Pitty!


Tell what?


That I was talking to thatto MissMrs. Melanie fanned her hot face with herhandkerchief. That woman with red hair, named Belle Watling!


Why, Melly! cried Scarlett, so shocked she could only stare.


Belle Watling was the red-haired woman she had seen on the street the first day she came toAtlanta and by now, she was easily the most notorious woman in town. Many prostitutes hadflocked into Atlanta, following the soldiers, but Belle stood out above the rest, due to her flaminghair and the gaudy, overly fashionable dresses she wore. She was seldom seen on Peachtree Streetor in any nice neighborhood, but when she did appear respectable women made haste to cross thestreet to remove themselves from her vicinity. And Melanie had been talking with her. No wonderUncle Peter was outraged.


I shall die if Aunt Pitty finds out! You know shell cry and tell everybody in town and Ill bedisgraced, sobbed Melanie. And it wasnt my fault. II couldnt run away from her. It wouldhave been so rude. Scarlett, II felt sorry for her. Do you think Im bad for feeling that way?


But Scarlett was not concerned with the ethics of the matter. Like most innocent and well-bredyoung women, she had a devouring curiosity about prostitutes.


What did she want? What does she talk like?


Oh, she used awful grammar but I could see she was trying so hard to be elegant, poor thing. Icame out of the hospital and Uncle Peter and the carriage werent waiting, so I thought Id walkhome. And when I went by the Emersons yard, there she was hiding behind the hedge! Oh, thankHeaven, the Emersons are in Macon! And she said, Please, Mrs. Wilkes, do speak a minute withme. I dont know how she knew my name. I knew I ought to run as hard as I could butwell,Scarlett, she looked so sad andwell, sort of pleading. And she had on a black dress and blackbonnet and no paint and really looked decent but for that red hair. And before I could answer shesaid, I know I shouldnt speak to you but I tried to talk to that old peahen, Mrs. Elsing, and she ranme away from the hospital.


Did she really call her a peahen? said Scarlett pleasedly and laughed.


Oh, dont laugh. It isnt funny. It seems that Missthis woman, wanted to do something for thehospitalcan you imagine it? She offered to nurse every morning and, of course, Mrs. Elsing musthave nearly died at the idea and ordered her out of the hospital. And then she said, I want to dosomething, too. Aint I a Confedrut, good as you?And, Scarlett, I was right touched at her wantingto help. You know, she cant be all bad if she wants to help the Cause. Do you think Im bad to feelthat way?


For Heavens sake, Melly, who cares if youre bad? What else did she say?


She said shed been watching the ladies go by to the hospital and thought I hadaa kindface and so she stopped me. She had some money and she wanted me to take it and use it for thehospital -and not tell a soul where it came from. She said Mrs. Elsing wouldnt let it be used if sheknew what kind of money it was. What kind of money! Thats when I thought Id swoon! And Iwas so upset and anxious to get away, I just said: Oh, yes, indeed, how sweet of you or somethingidiotic, and she smiled and said: Thats right Christian of you and shoved this duty handkerchiefinto my hand. Ugh, can you smell the perfume?


Melanie held out a mans handkerchief, soiled and highly perfumed, in which some coins wereknotted.


She was saying thank you and something about bringing me some money every week and justthen Uncle Peter drove up and saw me! Melly collapsed into tears and laid her head on the pillow.


And when he saw who was with me, heScarlett, he hollered at me! Nobody has ever hollered atme before in my whole life. And he said. You git in dis ayah cahige dis minute! Of course, I did,and all the way home he blessed me out and wouldnt let me explain and said he was going to tellAunt Pitty. Scarlett, do go down and beg him not to tell her. Perhaps he will listen to you. It willkill Auntie if she knows I ever even looked that woman in the face. Will you?


Yes, I will. But lets see how much money is in here. It feels heavy.


She untied the knot and a handful of gold coins rolled out on the bed.


Scarlett, theres fifty dollars here! And in gold! cried Melanie, awed, as she counted the brightpieces. Tell me, do you think its all right to use this kindwell, money madeerthis way forthe boys? Dont you think that maybe God will understand that she wanted to help and wont careif it is tainted? When I think of how many things the hospital needs


But Scarlett was not listening. She was looking at the dirty handkerchief, and humiliation andfury were filling her. There was a monogram in the corner in which were the initials R. K. B. Inher top drawer was a handkerchief just like this, one that Rhett Butler had lent her only yesterdayto wrap about the stems of wild flowers they had picked. She had planned to return it to him whenhe came to supper tonight.


So Rhett consorted with that vile Watling creature and gave her money. That was where thecontribution to the hospital came from. Blockade gold. And to think that Rhett would have the gallto look a decent woman in the face after being with that creature! And to think that she could havebelieved he was in love with her! This proved he couldnt be.


Bad women and all they involved were mysterious and revolting matters to her. She knew thatmen patronized these women for purposes which no lady should mentionor, if she did mentionthem, in whispers and by indirection and euphemism. She had always thought that only commonvulgar men visited such women. Before this moment, it had never occurred to her that nice menthat is, men she met at nice homes and with whom she dancedcould possibly do such things. Itopened up an entirely new field of thought and one that was horrifying. Perhaps all men did this! Itwas bad enough that they forced their wives to go through such indecent performances but toactually seek out low women and pay them for such accommodation! Oh, men were so vile, andRhett Butler was the worst of them all!


She would take this handkerchief and fling it in his face and show him the door and never, neverspeak to him again. But no, of course she couldnt do that. She could never, never let him knowshe even realized that bad women existed, much less that he visited them. A lady could never dothat.


Oh, she thought in fury. If I just wasnt a lady, what wouldnt I tell that varmint!


And, crumbling the handkerchief in her hand, she went down the stairs to the kitchen in searchof Uncle Peter. As she passed the stove, she shoved the handkerchief into the flames and withimpotent anger watched it burn.


------------""


------------"


------------


""------------"""