Chapter 21


AFTER SENDING UP Melanies breakfast tray, Scarlett dispatched Prissy for Mrs. Meade andsat down with Wade to eat her own breakfast. But for once she had no appetite. Between hernervous apprehension over the thought that Melanies time was approaching and her unconsciousstraining to hear the sound of the cannon, she could hardly eat. Her heart acted very queerly,beating regularly for several minutes and then thumping so loudly and swiftly it almost made hersick at her stomach. The heavy hominy stuck in her throat like glue and never before had themixture of parched corn and ground-up yams that passed for coffee been so repulsive. Withoutsugar or cream it was bitter as gall, for the sorghum used for long sweetening did little toimprove the taste. After one swallow she pushed her cup away. If for no other reason she hated theYankees because they kept her from having real coffee with sugar and thick cream in it.


Wade was quieter than usual and did not set up his every morning complaint against the hominythat he so disliked. He ate silently the spoonfuls she pushed into his mouth and washed them downwith noisily gulped water. His soft brown eyes followed her every movement, large, round asdollars, childish bewilderment in them though her own scarce-hidden fears had been communic(a) atedto him.When he hadfinished sh(as) e sent him off to the back yard to play and watchedhim toddle across the straggling grass to his playhouse with great relief.


She arose and stood irresolutely at the foot of the stairs. She should go up and sit with Melanieand distract her mind from her coming ordeal but she did not feel equal to it. Of all days in theworld, Melanie had to pick this day to have the baby! And of all days to talk about dying!


She sat down on the bottom step of the stairs and tried to compose herself, wondering again howyesterdays battle had gone, wondering how todays fighting was going. How strange to have a bigbattle going on just a few miles away and to know nothing of it! How strange the quiet of thisdeserted end of town in contrast with the day of the fighting at Peachtree Creek! Aunt Pittys housewas one of the last on the north side of Atlanta and with the fighting somewhere to the far south,there were no reinforcements going by at double-quick, no ambulances and staggering lines ofwalking wounded coming back. She wondered if such scenes were being enacted on the south sideof town and thanked God she was not there. If only everyone except the Meades and the Merriwethers had not refugeed from this north end of Peachtree! It made her feel forsaken andalone.


She wished fervently that Uncle Peter were with her so he could go down to headquartersand learn the news. If it wasnt for Melanie shed go to town this very minute and learn for herself,but she couldnt leave until Mrs. Meade arrived. Mrs. Meade. Why didnt she come on? And wherewas Prissy?


She rose and went out onto the front porch and looked for them impatiently, but the Meadehouse was around a shady bend in the street and she could see no one. After a long while Prissycame into view, alone, switching her skirts from side to side and looking over her shoulder toobserve the effect.


Youre as slow as molasses in January, snapped Scarlett as Prissy opened the gate. What didMrs. Meade say? How soon will she be over here?


She warnt dar, said Prissy.


Where is she? When will she be home?


Welm, answered Prissy, dragging out her words pleasurably to give more weight to hermessage. Dey Cookie say Miss Meade done got wud early dis mawnin dat young Mist Phil donebeen shot an Miss Meade she tuck de cahige an Ole Talbot an Betsy an dey done gone ter fotchhim home. Cookie say he bad hurt an Miss Meade ain gwine ter be studyin bout comin uphyah.


Scarlett stared at her and had an impulse to shake her. Negroes were always so proud of beingthe bearers of evil tidings.


Well, dont stand there like a ninny. Go down to Mrs. Merriwethers and ask her to come up orsend her mammy. Now, hurry.


Dey ain dar, Miss Scarlett. Ah drapped in ter pass time of de day wid Mammy on mah wayhome. Deys done gone. House all locked up. Spec deys at de horsepittle.


So thats where you were so long! Whenever I send you somewhere you go where I tell youand dont stop to pass any time with anybody. Go


She stopped and racked her brain. Who was left in town among their friends who would behelpful? There was Mrs. Elsing. Of course, Mrs. Elsing didnt like her at all these days but she hadalways been fond of Melanie.


Go to Mrs. Elsings, and explain everything very carefully and ten her to please come up here.


And, Prissy, listen to me. Miss Mellys baby is due and she may need you any minute now. Nowyou hurry right straight back.


Yasm, said Prissy and, turning, sauntered down the walk at snails gait.


Hurry, you slow poke!


Yasm.


Prissy quickened her gait infinitesimally and Scarlett went back into the house. She hesitatedagain before going upstairs to Melanie. She would have to explain to her just why Mrs. Meadecouldnt come and the knowledge that Phil Meade was badly wounded might upset her. Well, shed tell a lie about it.


She entered Melanies room and saw that the breakfast tray was untouched. Melanie lay on herside, her face white.


Mrs. Meades over at the hospital, said Scarlett But Mrs. Rising is coming. Do you feelbad?


Not very, lied Melanie. Scarlett, how long did it take Wade to get born?


Less than no time, answered Scarlett with a cheerfulness she was far from feeling. I was outin the yard and I didnt hardly have time to get into the house. Mammy said it was scandalousjust like one of the darkies.


I hope Ill be like one of the darkies too, said Melanie, mustering a smile which suddenlydisappeared as pain contorted her face.


Scarlett looked down at Melanies tiny hips with none too sanguine hopes but said reassuringly:


Oh, its not really so bad.


Oh, I know it isnt. Im afraid Im a little coward. Isis Mrs. Elsing coming right away?


Yes, right away, said Scarlett. Ill go down and get some fresh water and sponge you off. Itsso hot today.


She took as long a time as possible in getting the water, running to the front door every twominutes to see if Prissy were coming. There was no sign of Prissy so she went back upstairs,sponged Melanies perspiring body and combed out her long dark hair.


When an hour had passed she heard scuffing negro feet coming down the street, and looking outof the window, saw Prissy returning slowly, switching herself as before and tossing her head withas many airy affectations as if she had a large and interested audience.


Some day, Im going to take a strap to that little wench, thought Scarlett savagely, hurryingdown the stairs to meet her.


Miss Elsing ober at de horsepittle. Dey Cookie lows a whole lot of wounded sojers come in onde early train. Cookie fixin soup ter tek over dar. She say


Never mind what she said, interrupted Scarlett, her heart sinking. Put on a clean apronbecause I want you to go over to the hospital. Im going to give you a note to Dr. Meade, and if heisnt there, give it to Dr. Jones or any of the other doctors. And if you dont hurry back this time,Ill skin you alive.


Yasm.


And ask any of the gentlemen for news of the fighting. If they dont know, go by the depot andask the engineers who brought the wounded in. Ask if they are fighting at Jonesboro or near there.


Gawdlmighty, Miss Scarlett! and sudden fright was in Prissys black face. De Yankees ain atTara, is dey?


I dont know. Im telling you to ask for news.


Gawdlmighty, Miss Scarlett! Whutll dey do ter Maw?


Prissy began to bawl suddenly, loudly, the sound adding to Scarletts own uneasiness.


Stop bawling! Miss Melanie will hear you. Now go change your apron, quick.


Spurred to speed, Prissy hurried toward the back of the house while Scarlett scratched a hastynote on the margin of Geralds last letter to herthe only bit of paper in the house. As she foldedit, so that her note was uppermost, she caught Geralds words, Your mothertyphoidunder noconditionto come home She almost sobbed. If it wasnt for Melanie, shed start home, rightthis minute, if she had to walk every step of the way.


Prissy went off at a trot, the letter gripped in her hand, and Scarlett went back upstairs, trying tothink of some plausible lie to explain Mrs. Elsings failure to appear. But Melanie asked noquestions. She lay upon her back, her face tranquil and sweet, and the sight of her quieted Scarlettfor a while.


She sat down and tried to talk of inconsequential things, but the thoughts of Tara and a possibledefeat by the Yankees, prodded cruelly. She thought of Ellen dying and of the Yankees coming intoAtlanta, burning everything, killing everybody. Through it all, the dull far-off thundering persisted,rolling into her ears in waves of fear. Finally, she could not talk at all and only stared out of thewindow at the hot still street and the dusty leaves hanging motionless on the trees. Melanie wassilent too, but at intervals her quiet face was wrenched with pain.


She said, after each pain: It wasnt very bad, really, and Scarlett knew she was lying. Shewould have preferred a loud scream to silent endurance. She knew she should feel sorry forMelanie, but somehow she could not muster a spark of sympathy. Her mind was too torn with herown anguish. Once she looked sharply at the pain-twisted face and wondered why it should be thatshe, of all people in the world, should be here with Melanie at this particular timeshe who hadnothing in common with her, who hated her, who would gladly have seen her dead. Well, maybeshed have her wish, and before the day was over too. A cold superstitious fear swept her at thisthought. It was bad luck to wish that someone were dead, almost as bad luck as to curse someone.


Curses came home to roost, Mammy said. She hastily prayed that Melanie wouldnt die and brokeinto feverish small talk, hardly aware of what she said. At last, Melanie put a hot hand on her wrist.


Dont bother about talking, dear. I know how worried you are. Im so sorry Im so muchtrouble.


Scarlett relapsed into silence but she could not sit still. What would she do if neither the doctornor Prissy got there in time? She walked to the window and looked down the street and came backand sat down again. Then she rose and looked out of the window on the other side of the room.


An hour went by and then another. Noon came and the sun was high and hot and not a breath ofair stirred the dusty leaves. Melanies pains were harder now. Her long hair was drenched in sweatand her gown stuck in wet spots to her body. Scarlett sponged her face in silence but fear wasgnawing at her. God in Heaven, suppose the baby came before the doctor arrived! What would shedo? She knew less than nothing of midwifery. This was exactly the emergency she had beendreading for weeks. She had been counting on Prissy to handle the situation if no doctor should beavailable. Prissy knew all about midwifery. Shed said so time and again. But where was Prissy?


Why didnt she come? Why didnt the doctor come? She went to the window and looked again.


She listened hard and suddenly she wondered if it were only her imagination or if the sound ofcannon in the distance had died away. If it were farther away it would mean that the fighting wasnearer Jonesboro and that would meanAt last she saw Prissy coming down the street at a quick trot and she leaned out of the window.


Prissy, looking up, saw her and her mouth opened to yell. Seeing the panic written on the littleblack face and fearing she might alarm Melanie by crying out evil tidings, Scarlett hastily put herfinger to her lips and left the window.


Ill get some cooler water, she said, looking down into Melanies dark, deep-circled eyes andtrying to smile. Then she hastily left the room, closing the door carefully behind her.


Prissy was sitting on the bottom step in the hall, panting.


Deys fightin at Jonesboro, Miss Scarlett! Dey say our gempmums is gittin beat. Oh, Gawd,Miss Scarlett! Whutll happen ter Maw an Poke? Oh, Gawd, Miss Scarlett! Whutll happen ter useffen de Yankees gits hyah? Oh, Gawd


Scarlett clapped a hand over the blubbery mouth.


For Gods sake, hush!


Yes, what would happen to them if the Yankees camewhat would happen to Tara? She pushedthe thought firmly back into her mind and grappled with the more pressing emergency. If shethought of these things, shed begin to scream and bawl like Prissy.


Wheres Dr. Meade? Whens he coming?


Ah ain nebber seed him, Miss Scarlett.


What!


Nom, he ain at de horsepittle. Miss Merriwether an Miss Elsing ain dar needer. A man hetole me de doctah down by de car shed wid the wounded sojers jes come in frum Jonesboro, butMiss Scarlett, Ah wuz sceered ter go down dar ter de sheddeys folkses dyin down dar. Ahssceered of daid folkses


What about the other doctors?


Miss Scarlett, fo Gawd, Ah couldn sceercely git one of dem ter read yo note. Dey wukin inde horsepittle lak dey all done gone crazy. One doctah he say ter me, Damn yo hide! Doan youcome roun hyah bodderin me bout babies wen we got a mess of men dyin hyah. Git somewoman ter hep you. An den Ah went aroun an about an ask fer news lak you done tole me an


dey all say fightin at Jonesboro an Ah


You say Dr. Meades at the depot?


Yasm. He


Now, listen sharp to me. Im going to get Dr. Meade and I want you to sit by Miss Melanie anddo anything she says. And if you so much as breathe to her where the fighting is, Ill sell you Southas sure as guns iron. And dont you tell her that the other doctors wouldnt come either. Do youhear?


Yasm.


Wipe your eyes and get a fresh pitcher of water and go on up. Sponge her off. Tell her Ivegone for Dr. Meade.


Is her time nigh, Miss Scarlett?


I dont know. Im afraid it is but I dont know. You should know. Go on up.


Scarlett caught up her wide straw bonnet from the console table and jammed it on her head. Shelooked in the mirror and automatically pushed up loose strands of hair but she did not see her ownreflection. Cold little ripples of fear that started in the pit of her stomach were radiating outwarduntil the fingers that touched her cheeks were cold, though the rest of her body streamed perspiration.


She hurried out of the house and into the heat of the sun. It was blindingly, glaring hot and asshe hurried down Peachtree Street her temples began to throb from the heat. From far down thestreet she could hear the rise and fall and roar of many voices. By the time she caught sight of theLeyden house, she was beginning to pant, for her stays were tightly laced, but she did not slow hergait. The roar of noise grew louder.


From the Leyden house down to Five Points, the street seethed with activity, the activity of ananthill just destroyed. Negroes were running up and down the street, panic in their faces; and onporches, white children sat crying untended. The street was crowded with army wagons andambulances filled with wounded and carriages piled high with valises and pieces of furniture. Menon horseback dashed out of side streets pell-mell down Peachtree toward Hoods headquarters. Infront of the Bonnell house, old Amos stood holding the head of the carriage horse and he greetedScarlett with rolling eyes.


Aint you gone yit, Miss Scarlett? We is goin now. Ole Miss packin her bag.


Going? Where?


Gawd knows, Miss. Somewheres. De Yankees is comin!


She hurried on, not even saying good-by. The Yankees were coming! At Wesley Chapel, shepaused to catch her breath and wait for her hammering heart to subside. If she did not quiet herselfshe would certainly faint As she stood clutching a lamp post for support, she saw an officer onhorseback come charging up the street from Five Points and, on an impulse, she ran out into thestreet and waved at him.


Oh, stop! Please, stop!


He reined in so suddenly the horse went back on its haunches, pawing the air. There were harshlines of fatigue and urgency in his face but his tattered gray hat was off with a sweep.


Tell me, is it true? Are the Yankees coming?


Im afraid so.


Do you know so?


Yes, Mam. I know so. A dispatch came in to headquarters half an hour ago from the fighting at Jonesboro.


At Jonesboro? Are you sure?


Im sure. Theres no use telling pretty lies, Madam. The message was from General Hardee andit said: I have lost the battle and am in full retreat.


Oh, my God!


The dark face of the tired man looked down without emotion. He gathered the reins again andput on his hat.


Oh, sir, please, just a minute. What shall we do?


Madam, I cant say. The army is evacuating Atlanta soon.


Going off and leaving us to the Yankees?


Im afraid so.


The spurred horse went off as though on springs and Scarlett was left standing in the middle ofthe street with the red dust thick upon her ankles.


The Yankees were coming. The army was leaving. The Yankees were coming. What should shedo? Where should she run? No, she couldnt run. There was Melanie back there in the bedexpecting that baby. Oh, why did women have babies? If it wasnt for Melanie she could takeWade and Prissy and hide in the woods where the Yankees could never find them. But she couldnttake Melanie to the woods. No, not now. Oh, if shed only had the baby sooner, yesterday even,perhaps they could get an ambulance and take her away and hide her somewhere. But nowshemust find Dr. Meade and make him come home with her. Perhaps he could hurry the baby.


She gathered up her skirts and ran down the street, and the rhythm of her feet was The Yankeesare coming! The Yankees are coming! Five Points was crowded with people who rushed here andthere with unseeing eyes, jammed with wagons, ambulances, ox carts, carriages loaded withwounded. A roaring sound like the breaking of surf rose from the crowd.


Then a strangely incongruous sight struck her eyes. Throngs of women were coming up fromthe direction of the railroad tracks carrying hams across their shoulders. Little children hurried bytheir sides, staggering under buckets of steaming molasses. Young boys dragged sacks of corn andpotatoes. One old man struggled along with a small barrel of flour on a wheelbarrow. Men, womenand children, black and white, hurried, hurried with straining faces, lugging packages and sacksand boxes of foodmore food than she had seen in a year. The crowd suddenly gave a lane for acareening carriage and through the lane came the frail and elegant Mrs. Elsing, standing up in thefront of her victoria, reins in one hand, whip in the other. She was hatless and white faced and herlong gray hair streamed down her back as she lashed the horse like a Fury.


Jouncing on the backseat of the carriage was her black mammy, Melissy, clutching a greasy side of bacon to her withone hand, while with the other and both feet she attempted to hold the boxes and bags piled allabout her. One bag of dried peas had burst and the peas strewed themselves into the street Scarlettscreamed to her, but the tumult of the crowd drowned her voice and the carriage rocked madly by.


For a moment she could not understand what it all meant and then, remembering that thecommissary warehouses were down by the railroad tracks, she realized that the army had thrown them open to the people to salvage what they could before the Yankees came.


She pushed her way swiftly through the crowds, past the packed, hysterical mob surging in theopen space of Five Points, and hurried as fast as she could down the short block toward the depot.


Through the tangle of ambulances and the clouds of dust, she could see doctors and stretcherbearers bending, lifting, hurrying. Thank God, shed find Dr. Meade soon. As she rounded thecorner of the Atlanta Hotel and came in full view of the depot and the tracks, she halted appalled.


Lying in the pitiless sun, shoulder to shoulder, head to feet, were hundreds of wounded men,lining the tracks, the sidewalks, stretched out in endless rows under the car shed. Some lay stiffand still but many writhed under the hot sun, moaning. Everywhere, swarms of flies hovered overthe men, crawling and buzzing in their faces, everywhere was blood, dirty bandages, groans,screamed curses of pain as stretcher bearers lifted men. The smell of sweat, of blood, of unwashedbodies, of excrement rose up in waves of blistering heat until the fetid stench almost nauseated her.


The ambulance men hurrying here and there among the prostrate forms frequently stepped onwounded men, so thickly packed were the rows, and those trodden upon stared stolidly up, waitingtheir turn.


She shrank back, clapping her hand to her mouth feeling that she was going to vomit. Shecouldnt go on. She had seen wounded men in the hospitals, wounded men on Aunt Pittys lawnafter the fighting at the creek, but never anything like this. Never anything like these stinking,bleeding bodies broiling under the glaring sun. This was an inferno of pain and smell and noiseand hurryhurryhurry! The Yankees are coming! The Yankees are coming! She braced hershoulders and went down among them, straining her eyes among the upright figures to distinguishDr. Meade. But she discovered she could not look for him, for if she did not step carefully shewould tread on some poor soldier. She raised her skirts and tried to pick her way among themtoward a knot of men who were directing the stretcher bearers.


As she walked, feverish hands plucked at her skirt and voices croaked: Ladywater! Please,lady, water! For Christs sake, water!


Perspiration came down her face in streams as she pulled her skirts from clutching hands. If shestepped on one of these men, shed scream and faint. She stepped over dead men, over men wholay dull eyed with hands clutched to bellies where dried blood had glued torn uniforms to wounds,over men whose beards were stiff with blood and from whose broken jaws came sounds whichmust mean:


Water! Water!


If she did not find Dr. Meade soon, she would begin screaming with hysteria. She looked towardthe group of men under the car shed and cried as loudly as she could: Dr. Meade! Is Dr. Meadethere?


From the group one man detached himself and looked toward her. It was the doctor. He wascoatless and his sleeves were rolled up to his shoulders. His shirt and trousers were as red as abutchers and even the end of his iron-gray beard was matted with blood. His face was the face of aman drunk with fatigue and impotent rage and burning pity. It was gray and dusty, and sweat hadstreaked long rivulets across his cheeks. But his voice was calm and decisive as he called to her.


Thank God, you are here. I can use every pair of hands.


For a moment she stared at him bewildered, dropping her skirts in dismay. They fell over thedirty face of a wounded man who feebly tried to turn his head to escape from their smotheringfolds. What did the doctor mean? The dust from the ambulances came into her face with chokingdryness, and the rotten smells were like a foul liquid in her nostrils.


Hurry, child! Come here.


She picked up her skirts and went to him as fast as she could go across the rows of bodies. Sheput her hand on his arm and felt that it was trembling with weariness but there was no weakness inhis face.


Oh, Doctor! she cried. You must come. Melanie is having her baby.


He looked at her as if her words did not register on his mind. A man who lay upon the ground ather feet, his head pillowed on his canteen, grinned up companionably at her words.


They will do it, he said cheerfully.


She did not even look down but shook the doctors arm.


Its Melanie. The baby. Doctor, you must come. She the This was no time for delicacybut it was hard to bring out the words with the ears of hundreds of strange men listening.


The pains are getting hard. Please, Doctor!


A baby? Great God! thundered the doctor and his face was suddenly contorted with hate andrage, a rage not directed at her or at anyone except a world wherein such things could happen.


Are you crazy? I cant leave these men. They are dying, hundreds of them. I cant leave them fora damned baby. Get some woman to help you. Get my wife.


She opened her mouth to ten him why Mrs. Meade could not come and then shut it abruptly. Hedid not know his own son was wounded! She wondered if he would still be here if he did know,and something told her that even if Phil were dying he would still be standing on this spot, givingaid to the many instead of the one.


No, you must come, Doctor. You know you said shed have a hard time Was it really she,Scarlett, standing here saying these dreadful indelicate things at the top of her voice in this hell ofheat and groans? Shell die if you dont come!


He shook off her hand roughly and spoke as though he hardly heard her, hardly knew what shesaid.


Die? Yes, theyll all dieall these men. No bandages, no salves, no quinine, no chloroform.


Oh, God, for some morphia! Just a little morphia for the worst ones. Just a little chloroform. Goddamn the Yankees! God damn the Yankees!


Give um hell, Doctor! said the man on the ground, his teeth showing in his beard.


Scarlett began to shake and her eyes burned with tears of fright. The doctor wasnt coming withher. Melanie would die and she had wished that she would die. The doctor wasnt coming.


Name of God, Doctor! Please!


Dr. Meade bit his lip and his jaw hardened as his face went cool again.


Child, Ill try. I cant promise you. But Ill try. When we get these men tended to. The Yankeesare coming and the troops are moving out of town. I dont know what theyll do with the wounded.


There arent any trains. The Macon line has been captured. ... But Ill try. Run along now. Dontbother me. Theres nothing much to bringing a baby. Just tie up the cord.


He turned as an orderly touched his arm and began firing directions and pointing to this and thatwounded man. The man at her feet looked up at Scarlett compassionately. She turned away, for thedoctor had forgotten her.


She picked her way rapidly through the wounded and back to Peachtree Street. The doctorwasnt coming. She would have to see it through herself. Thank God, Prissy knew all aboutmidwifery. Her head ached from the heat and she could feel her basque, soaking wet fromperspiration, sticking to her. Her mind felt numb and so did her legs, numb as in a nightmare whenshe tried to run and could not move them. She thought of the long walk back to the house and itseemed interminable.


Then, The Yankees are coming! began to beat its refrain in her mind again. Her heart began topound and new life came into her limbs. She hurried into the crowd at Five Points, now so thickthere was no room on the narrow sidewalks and she was forced to walk in the street. Long lines ofsoldiers were passing, dust covered, sodden with weariness. There seemed thousands of them,bearded, dirty, their guns slung over their shoulders, swiftly passing at route step. Cannon rolledpast, the drivers flaying the thin mules with lengths of rawhide. Commissary wagons with torncanvas covers rocked through the ruts. Cavalry raising clouds of choking dust went past endlessly.


She had never seen so many soldiers together before. Retreat! Retreat! The army was moving out.


The hurrying lines pushed her back onto the packed sidewalk and she smelled the reek of cheapcorn whisky. There were women in the mob near Decatur Street, garishly dressed women whosebright finery and painted faces gave a discordant note of holiday. Most of them were drunk and thesoldiers on whose arms they hung were drunker. She caught a fleeting glimpse of a head of redcurls and saw that creature, Belle Watling, heard her shrill drunken laughter as she clung forsupport to a one-armed soldier who reeled and staggered.


When she had shoved and pushed her way through the mob for a block beyond Five Points thecrowd thinned a little and, gathering up her skirts, she began to run again. When she reachedWesley Chapel, she was breathless and dizzy and sick at her stomach. Her stays were cutting herribs in two. She sank down on the steps of the church and buried her head in her hands until shecould breathe more easily. If she could only get one deep breath, way down in her abdomen. If herheart would only stop bumping and drumming and cavorting. If there were only someone in thismad place to whom she could turn.


Why, she had never had to do a thing for herself in all her life. There had always been someoneto do things for her, to look after her, shelter and protect her and spoil her. It was incredible thatshe could be in such a fix. Not a friend, not a neighbor to help her. There had always been friends,neighbors, the competent hands of willing slaves. And now in this hour of greatest need, there wasno one. It was incredible that she could be so completely alone, and frightened, and far from home.


Home! If she were only home, Yankees or no Yankees. Home, even if Ellen was sick. Shelonged for the sight of Ellens sweet face, for Mammys strong arms around her.


She rose dizzily to her feet and started walking again. When she came in sight of the house, shesaw Wade swinging on the front gate. When he saw her, his face puckered and he began to cry,holding up a grubby bruised finger.


Hurt! he sobbed. Hurt!


Hush! Hush! Hush! Or Ill spank you. Go out in the back yard and make mud pies and dontmove from there.


Wade hungwy, he sobbed and put tin hurt finger in his mouth.


I dont care. Go in the back yard and She looked up and saw Prissy leaning out of theupstairs window, fright and worry written on her face; but in an instant they were wiped away inrelief as she saw her mistress. Scarlett beckoned to her to come down and went into the house.


How cool it was in the hall. She untied her bonnet and flung it on the table, drawing her forearmsacross her wet forehead. She heard the upstairs door open and a low wailing moan, wrenched fromthe depths of agony, came to her ears. Prissy came down the stairs three at a time.


Is de doctah come?


No. He cant come.


Gawd, Miss Scarlett! Miss Melly bad off!


The doctor cant come. Nobody can come. Youve got to bring the baby and Ill help you.


Prissys mouth fell open and her tongue wagged wordlessly. She looked at Scarlett sideways andscuffed her feet and twisted her thin body.


Dont look so simple minded! cried Scarlett, infuriated at her silly expression. Whats thematter?


Prissy edged back up the stairs.


Fo Gawd, Miss Scarlett Fright and shame were in her rolling eyes.


Fo Gawd, Miss Scarlett! Wes got ter have a doctah. AhAhMiss Scarlett, Ah doan knownuthin bout bringin babies. Maw wouldn nebber lemme be round folkses whut wuz havin


dem.


All the breath went out of Scarletts lungs in one gasp of horror before rage swept her. Prissymade a lunge past her, bent on flight, but Scarlett grabbed her.


You black liarwhat do you mean? Youve been saying you knew everything about birthingbabies. What is the truth? Tell me! She shook her until the kinky head rocked drunkenly.


Ahs lyin, Miss Scarlett! Ah doan know huccome Ah tell sech a lie. Ah jes see one babybirthed, an Maw she lak ter wo me out fer watchin.


Scarlett glared at her and Prissy shrank back, trying to pull loose. For a moment her mind refused to accept the truth, but when realization finally came to her that Prissy knew no more aboutmidwifery than she did, anger went over her like a flame. She had never struck a slave in all herlife, but now she slapped the black cheek with all the force in her tired arm. Prissy screamed at thetop of her voice, more from fright than pain, and began to dance up and down, writhing to breakScarletts grip.


As she screamed, the moaning from the second floor ceased and a moment later Melaniesvoice, weak and trembling, called: Scarlett? Is it you? Please come! Please!


Scarlett dropped Prissys arm and the wench sank whimpering to the steps. For a momentScarlett stood still, looking up, listening to the low moaning which had begun again. As she stoodthere, it seemed as though a yoke descended heavily upon her neck, felt as though a heavy loadwere harnessed to it, a load she would feel as soon as she took a step.


She tried to think of all the things Mammy and Ellen had done for her when Wade was born butthe merciful blurring of the childbirth pains obscured almost everything in mist. She did recall afew things and she spoke to Prissy rapidly, authority in her voice.


Build a fire in the stove and keep hot water boiling in the kettle. And bring up all the towelsyou can find and that ball of twine. And get me the scissors. Dont come telling me you cant findthem. Get them and get them quick. Now hurry.


She jerked Prissy to her feet and sent her kitchenwards with a shove. Then she squared hershoulders and started up the stairs. It was going to be difficult, telling Melanie that she and Prissywere to deliver her baby.


"------------------------"


----"----"