Chapter 1

SCARLETT OHARA was not beautiful, but men seldom realized it when caught by her charmas the Tarleton twins were. In her face were too sharply blended the delicate features of her mother,a Coast aristocrat of French descent, and the heavy ones of her florid Irish father. But it was anarresting face, pointed of chin, square of jaw. Her eyes were pale green without a touch of hazel,starred with bristly black lashes and slightly tilted at the ends. Above them, her thick black browsslanted upward, cutting a startling oblique line in her magnolia-white skinthat skin so prized bySouthern women and so carefully guarded with bonnets, veils and mittens against hot Georgiasuns.

Seated with Stuart and Brent Tarleton in the cool shade of the porch of Tara, her fathersplantation, that bright April afternoon of 1861, she made a pretty picture. Her new green flowered-muslin dress spread its twelve yards of billowing material over her hoops and exactly matched theflat-heeled green morocco slippers her father had recently brought her from Atlanta. The dress set off to perfection the seventeen-inch waist, the smallest in three counties, and the tightly fittingbasque showed breasts well matured for her sixteen years. But for all the modesty of her spreadingskirts, the demureness of hair netted smoothly into a chignon and the quietness of small whitehands folded in her lap, her true self was poorly concealed. The green eyes in the carefully sweetface were turbulent, willful, lusty with life, distinctly at variance with her decorous demeanor. Hermanners had been imposed upon her by her mothers gentle admonitions and the sterner disciplineof her mammy; her eyes were her own.

On either side of her, the twins lounged easily in their chairs, squinting at the sunlight throughtall mint-garnished glasses as they laughed and talked, their long legs, booted to the knee and thickwith saddle muscles, crossed negligently. Nineteen years old, six feet two inches tall, long of boneand hard of muscle, with sunburned faces and deep auburn hair, their eyes merry and arrogant,their bodies clothed in identical blue coats and mustard-colored breeches, they were as much alikeas two bolls of cotton.

Outside, the late afternoon sun slanted down in the yard, throwing into gleaming brightness thedogwood trees that were solid masses of white blossoms against the background of new green. Thetwins horses were hitched in the driveway, big animals, red as their masters hair; and around thehorses legs quarreled the pack of lean, nervous possum hounds that accompanied Stuart and Brentwherever they went. A little aloof, as became an aristocrat, lay a black-spotted carriage dog,muzzle on paws, patiently waiting for the boys to go home to supper.

Between the hounds and the horses and the twins there was a kinship deeper than that of theirconstant companionship. They were all healthy, thoughtless young animals, sleek, graceful, high-spirited, the boys as mettlesome as the horses they rode, mettlesome and dangerous but, withal,sweet-tempered to those who knew how to handle them.

Although born to the ease of plantation life, waited on hand and foot since infancy, the faces ofthe three on the porch were neither slack nor soft. They had the vigor and alertness of countrypeople who have spent all their lives in the open and troubled their heads very little with dullthings in books. Life in the north Georgia county of Clayton was still new and, according to thestandards of Augusta, Savannah and Charleston, a little crude. The more sedate and older sectionsof the South looked down their noses at the up-country Georgians, but here in north Georgia, alack of the niceties of classical education carried no shame, provided a man was smart in the thingsthat mattered. And raising good cotton, riding well, shooting straight, dancing lightly, squiring theladies with elegance and carrying ones liquor like a gentleman were the things that mattered.

In these accomplishments the twins excelled, and they were equally outstanding in theirnotorious inability to learn anything contained between the covers of books. Their family had moremoney, more horses, more slaves than any one else in the County, but the boys had less grammarthan most of their poor Cracker neighbors.

It was for this precise reason that Stuart and Brent were idling on the porch of Tara this Aprilafternoon. They had just been expelled from the University of Georgia, the fourth university thathad thrown them out in two years; and their older brothers, Tom and Boyd, had come home withthem, because they refused to remain at an institution where the twins were not welcome. Stuartand Brent considered their latest expulsion a fine joke, and Scarlett, who had not willingly opened a book since leaving the Fayetteville Female Academy the year before, thought it just as amusingas they did.

I know you two dont care about being expelled, or Tom either, she said. But what aboutBoyd? Hes kind of set on getting an education, and you two have pulled him out of the Universityof Virginia and Alabama and South Carolina and now Georgia. Hell never get finished at thisrate.

Oh, he read law in Judge Parmalees office over in Fayetteville, answered Brent carelessly.Besi(can) des, it dont matter much. Wed have had to come home before the term was outanyway.

Why?

The war, goose! The wars going to start any day, and you dont suppose any of us would stayin college with a war going on, do you?

You know there isnt going to be any war, said Scarlett, bored. Its all just talk. Why, AshleyWilkes and his father told Pa just last week that our commissioners in Washington would come totoanamicable agreement with Mr. Lincoln about the Confederacy. And anyway, theYankees are too scared of us to fight. There wont be any war, and Im tired of hearing about it.

Not going to be any war! cried the twins indignantly, as though they had been defrauded.

Why, honey, of course theres going to be a war, said Stuart. The Yankees may be scared of us,but after the way General Beauregard shelled them out of Fort Sumter day before yesterday, theyllhave to fight or stand branded as cowards before the whole world. Why, the Confederacy

Scarlett made a mouth of bored impatience.

If you say war just once more, Ill go in the house and shut the door. Ive never gotten so tiredof any one word in my life as war, unless its secession. Pa talks war morning, noon and night,and all the gentlemen who come to see him shout about Fort Sumter and States Rights and AbeLincoln till I get so bored I could scream! And thats all the boys talk about, too, that and their oldTroop. There hasnt been any fun at any party this spring because the boys cant talk aboutanything else. Im mighty glad Georgia waited till after Christmas before it seceded or it wouldhave ruined the Christmas parties, too. If you say war again, Ill go in the house.

She meant what she said, for she could never long endure any conversation of which she wasnot the chief subject. But she smiled when she spoke, consciously deepening her dimple andfluttering her bristly black lashes as swiftly as butterflies wings. The boys were enchanted, as shehad intended them to be, and they hastened to apologize for boring her. They thought none the lessof her for her lack of interest. Indeed, they thought more. War was mens business, not ladies, andthey took her attitude as evidence of her femininity.

Having maneuvered them away from the boring subject of war, she went back with interest totheir immediate situation.

What did your mother say about you two being expelled again?

The boys looked uncomfortable, recalling their mothers conduct three months ago when theyhad come home, by request, from the University of Virginia.

Well, said Stuart, she hasnt had a chance to say anything yet. Tom and us left home earlythis morning before she got up, and Toms laying out over at the Fontaines while we came overhere.

Didnt she say anything when you got home last night?

We were in luck last night. Just before we got home that new stallion Ma got in Kentucky lastmonth was brought in, and the place was in a stew. The big brutehes a grand horse, Scarlett;you must tell your pa to come over and see him right awayhed already bitten a hunk out of hisgroom on the way down here and hed trampled two of Mas darkies who met the train atJonesboro. And just before we got home, hed about kicked the stable down and half-killedStrawberry, Mas old stallion. When we got home, Ma was out in the stable with a sackful of sugarsmoothing him down and doing it mighty well, too. The darkies were hanging from the rafters,popeyed, they were so scared, but Ma was talking to the horse like he was folks and he was eatingout of her hand. There aint nobody like Ma with a horse. And when she saw us she said: InHeavens name, what are you four doing home again? Youre worse than the plagues of Egypt!

And then the horse began snorting and rearing and she said: Get out of here! Cant you see hesnervous, the big darling? Ill tend to you four in the morning! So we went to bed, and this morningwe got away before she could catch us. and left Boyd to handle her.

Do you suppose shell hit Boyd? Scarlett, like the rest of the County, could never get used tothe way small Mrs. Tarleton bullied her grown sons and laid her riding crop on their backs if theoccasion seemed to warrant it.

Beatrice Tarleton was a busy woman, having on her hands not only a large cotton plantation, ahundred negroes and eight children, but the largest horse-breeding farm in the state as well. Shewas hot-tempered and easily plagued by the frequent scrapes of her four sons, and while no onewas permitted to whip a horse or a slave, she felt that a lick now and then didnt do the boys anyharm.

Of course she wont hit Boyd. She never did beat Boyd much because hes the oldest andbesides hes the runt of the litter, said Stuart, proud of his six feet two. Thats why we left him athome to explain things to her. Godlmighty, Ma ought to stop licking us! Were nineteen and Tomstwenty-one, and she acts like were six years old.

Will your mother ride the new horse to the Wilkes barbecue tomorrow?

She wants to, but Pa says hes too dangerous. And, anyway, the girls wont let her. They saidthey were going to have her go to one party at least like a lady, riding in the carriage.

I hope it doesnt rain tomorrow, said Scarlett. Its rained nearly every day for a week. Theresnothing worse than a barbecue turned into an indoor picnic.

Oh, itll be clear tomorrow and hot as June, said Stuart. Look at Oat sunset I never saw oneredder. You can always tell weather by sunsets.

They looked out across the endless acres of Gerald OHaras newly plowed cotton fields towardthe red horizon. Now that the sun was setting in a welter of crimson behind tin lulls across the FlintRiver, the warmth of the April day was ebbing into a faint but balmy chill.

Spring had come early that year, with warm quick rains and sudden frothing of pink peachblossoms and dogwood dappling with white stars the dark river swamp and far-off hills. Alreadythe plowing was nearly finished, and the bloody glory of the sunset colored the fresh-cut furrowsof red Georgia clay to even redder hues. The moist hungry earth, waiting upturned for the cottonseeds, showed pinkish on the sandy tops of furrows, vermilion and scarlet and maroon whereshadows lay along the sides of the trenches. The whitewashed brick plantation house seemed anisland set in a wild red sea, a sea of spiraling, curving, crescent billows petrified suddenly at themoment when the pink-tipped waves were breaking into surf. For here were no long, straightfurrows, such as could be seen in the yellow clay fields of the flat middle Georgia country or in thelush black earth of the coastal plantations. The rolling foothill country of north Georgia wasplowed in a million curves to keep the rich earth from washing down into the river bottoms.

It was a savagely red land, blood-colored after rains, brick dust in droughts, the best cotton landin the world. It was a pleasant land of white houses, peaceful plowed fields and sluggish yellowrivers, but a land of contrasts, of brightest sun glare and densest shade. The plantation clearingsand miles of cotton fields smiled up to a warm sun, placid, complacent. At their edges rose thevirgin forests, dark and cool even in the hottest noons, mysterious, a little sinister, the soughingpines seeming to wait with an age-old patience, to threaten with soft sighs: Be careful! Be careful!

We had you once. We can take you back again.

To the ears of the three on the porch came the sounds of hooves, the jingling of harness chainsand the shrill careless laughter of negro voices, as the field hands and mules came in from thefields. From within the house floated the soft voice of Scarletts mother, Ellen OHara, as shecalled to the little black girl who carried her basket of keys. The high-pitched, childish voiceanswered Yasm, and there were sounds of footsteps going out the back way toward thesmokehouse where Ellen would ration out the food to the home-coming hands. There was the clickof china and the rattle of silver as Pork, the valet-butler of Tara, laid the table for supper.

At these last sounds, the twins realized it was time they were starting home. But they were loathto face their mother and they lingered on the porch of Tara, momentarily expecting Scarlett to givethem an invitation to supper.

Look, Scarlett. About tomorrow, said Brent. Just because weve been away and didnt knowabout the barbecue and the ball, thats no reason why we shouldnt get plenty of dances tomorrownight. You havent promised them all, have you?

Well, I have! How did I know you all would be home? I couldnt risk being a wallflower justwaiting on you two.

You a wallflower! The boys laughed uproariously.

Look, honey. Youve got to give me the first waltz and Stu the last one and youve got to eatsupper with us. Well sit on the stair landing like we did at the last ball and get Mammy Jincy tocome tell our fortunes again.

I dont like Mammy Jincys fortunes. You know she said I was going to marry a gentlemanwith jet-black hair and a long black mustache, and I dont like black-haired gentlemen.

You like em red-headed, dont you, honey? grinned Brent Now, come on, promise us all the waltzes and the supper.

If youll promise, well tell you a secret, said Stuart.

What? cried Scarlett, alert as a child at the word.

Is it what we heard yesterday in Atlanta, Stu? If it is, you know we promised not to tell.

Well, Miss Pitty told us.

Miss Who?

You know, Ashley Wilkes cousin who lives in Atlanta, Miss Pittypat HamiltonCharles andMelanie Hamiltons aunt.

I do, and a sillier old lady I never met in all my life.

Well, when we were in Atlanta yesterday, waiting for the home train, her carriage went by thedepot and she stopped and talked to us, and she told us there was going to be an engagementannounced tomorrow night at the Wilkes ball.

Oh, I know about that, said Scarlett in disappointment. That silly nephew of hers, CharlieHamilton, and Honey Wilkes. Everybodys known for years that theyd get married some time,even if he did seem kind of lukewarm about it.

Do you think hes silly? questioned Brent. Last Christmas you sure let him buzz round youplenty.

I couldnt help him buzzing, Scarlett shrugged negligently. I think hes an awful sissy.

Besides, it isnt his engagement thats going to be announced, said Stuart triumphantly. ItsAshleys to Charlies sister, Miss Melanie!

Scarletts face did not change but her lips went whitelike a person who has received astunning blow without warning and who, in the first moments of shock, does not realize what hashappened. So still was her face as she stared at Stuart that he, never analytic, took it for grantedthat she was merely surprised and very interested.

Miss Pitty told us they hadnt intended announcing it till next year, because Miss Melly hasntbeen very well; but with all the war talk going around, everybody in both families thought it wouldbe better to get married soon. So its to be announced tomorrow night at the supper intermission.

Now, Scarlett, weve told you the secret, so youve got to promise to eat supper with us.

Of course I will, Scarlett said automatically.

And all the waltzes?

All.

Youre sweet! Ill bet the other boys will be hopping mad.

Let em be mad, said Brent. We two can handle em. Look, Scarlett. Sit with us at thebarbecue in the morning.

What?

Stuart repeated his request.

Of course.

The twins looked at each other jubilantly but with some surprise. Although they consideredthemselves Scarletts favored suitors, they had never before gained tokens of this favor so easily.

Usually she made them beg and plead, while she put them off, refusing to give a Yes or No answer,laughing if they sulked, growing cool if they became angry. And here she had practically promisedthem the whole of tomorrowseats by her at the barbecue, all the waltzes (and theyd see to it thatthe dances were all waltzes!) and the supper intermission. This was worth getting expelled fromthe university.

Filled with new enthusiasm by their success, they lingered on, talking about the barbecue andthe ball and Ashley Wilkes and Melanie Hamilton, interrupting each other, making jokes andlaughing at them, hinting broadly for invitations to supper. Some time had passed before theyrealized that Scarlett was having very little to say. The atmosphere had somehow changed. Justhow, the twins did not know, but the fine glow had gone out of the afternoon. Scarlett seemed to bepaying little attention to what they said, although she made the correct answers. Sensing somethingthey could not understand, baffled and annoyed by it, the twins struggled along for a while, andthen rose reluctantly, looking at their watches.

The sun was low across the new-plowed fields and the tall woods across the river were loomingblackly in silhouette. Chimney swallows were darting swiftly across the yard, and chickens, ducksand turkeys were waddling and strutting and straggling in from the fields.

Stuart bellowed: Jeems! And after an interval a tall black boy of their own age ran breathlesslyaround the house and out toward the tethered horses. Jeems was their body servant and, like thedogs, accompanied them everywhere. He had been their childhood playmate and had been given tothe twins for their own on their tenth birthday. At the sight of him, the Tarleton hounds rose up outof the red dust and stood waiting expectantly for their masters. The boys bowed, shook hands andtold Scarlett theyd be over at the Wilkeses early in the morning, waiting for her. Then they wereoff down the walk at a rush, mounted their horses and, followed by Jeems, went down the avenueof cedars at a gallop, waving their hats and yelling back to her.

When they had rounded the curve of the dusty road that hid them from Tara, Brent drew hishorse to a stop under a clump of dogwood. Stuart halted, too, and the darky boy pulled up a fewpaces behind them. The horses, feeling slack reins, stretched down their necks to crop the tenderspring grass, and the patient hounds lay down again in the soft red dust and looked up longingly atthe chimney swallows circling in the gathering dusk. Brents wide ingenuous face was puzzled andmildly indignant.

Look, he said. Dont it look to you like she would of asked us to stay for supper?

I thought she would, said Stuart. I kept waiting for her to do it, but she didnt. What do youmake of it?

I dont make anything of it But it just looks to me like she might of. After all, its our first dayhome and she hasnt seen us in quite a spell. And we had lots more things to tell her.

It looked to me like she was mighty glad to see us when we came.

I thought so, too.

And then, about a half-hour ago, she got kind of quiet, like she had a headache.

I noticed that but I didnt pay it any mind then. What do you suppose ailed her?

I dunno. Do you suppose we said something that made her mad?

They both thought for a minute.

I cant think of anything. Besides, when Scarlett gets mad, everybody knows it. She dont holdherself in like some girls do.

Yes, thats what I like about her. She dont go around being cold and hateful when shes madshe tells you about it. But it was something we did or said that made her shut up talking and looksort of sick. I could swear she was glad to see us when we came and was aiming to ask us tosupper.

You dont suppose its because we got expelled?

Hell, no! Dont be a fool. She laughed like everything when we told her about it. And besidesScarlett dont set any more store by book learning than we do.

Brent turned in the saddle and called to the negro groom.

Jeems!

Suh?

You heard what we were talking to Miss Scarlett about?

Nawsuh, Mist Brent! Huccome you think Ah be spyin on wite folks?

Spying, my God! You darkies know everything that goes on. Why, you liar, I saw you with myown eyes sidle round the corner of the porch and squat in the cape jessamine bush by the wall.

Now, did you hear us say anything that might have made Miss Scarlett mador hurt her feelings?

Thus appealed to, Teems gave up further pretense of not having overheard the conversation andfurrowed his black brow.

Nawsuh, Ah din notice yall say anything ter mek her mad. Look ter me lak she sho glad tersee you an sho had missed you, an she cheep along happy as a bird, tell bout de time yall got tertalkin bout Mist Ashley an Miss Melly Hamilton gittin mahied. Den she quiet down lak a birdwen de hawk fly ober.

The twins looked at each other and nodded, but without comprehension.

Jeems is right. But I dont see why, said Stuart. My Lord! Ashley dont mean anything to her,cept a friend. Shes not crazy about him. Its us shes crazy about.

Brent nodded an agreement.

But do you suppose, he said, that maybe Ashley hadnt told her he was going to announce ittomorrow night and she was mad at him for not telling her, an old friend, before he told everybodyelse? Girls set a big store on knowing such things first.

Well, maybe. But what if he hadnt told her it was tomorrow? It was supposed to be a secretand a surprise, and a mans got a right to keep his own engagement quiet, hasnt he? We wouldnthave known it if Miss Mellys aunt hadnt let it out. But Scarlett must have known he was going tomarry Miss Melly sometime. Why, weve known it for years. The Wilkes and Hamiltons alwaysmarry their own cousins. Everybody knew hed probably marry her some day, just like HoneyWilkes is going to marry Miss Mellys brother, Charles.

Well, I give it up. But Im sorry she didnt ask us to supper. I swear I dont want to go homeand listen to Ma take on about us being expelled. It isnt as if this was the first time.

Maybe Boyd will have smoothed her down by now. You know what a slick talker that littlevarmint is. You know he always can smooth her down.

Yes, he can do it, but it takes Boyd time. He has to talk around in circles till Ma gets soconfused that she gives up and tells him to save his voice for his law practice. But he aint had timeto get good started yet. Why, Ill bet you Ma is still so excited about the new horse that shell nevereven realize were home again till She sits down to supper tonight and sees Boyd. And beforesupper is over shell be going strong and breathing fire. And itll be ten oclock before Boyd gets achance to tell her that it wouldnt have been honorable for any of us to stay in college after the waythe Chancellor talked to you and me. And itll be midnight before he gets her turned around towhere shes so mad at the Chancellor shell be asking Boyd why he didnt shoot him. No, we cantgo home till after midnight

The twins looked at each other glumly. They were completely fearless of wild horses, shootingaffrays and the indignation of their neighbors, but they had a wholesome fear of their red-hairedmothers outspoken remarks and the riding crop that she did not scruple to lay across theirbreeches.

Well, look, said Brent. Lets go over to the Wilkes. Ashley and the girlsll be glad to have usfor supper.

Stuart looked a little discomforted.

No, dont lets go there. Theyll be in a stew getting ready for the barbecue tomorrow andbesides

Oh, I forgot about that, said Brent hastily. No, dont lets go there.

They clucked to their horses and rode along in silence for a while, a flush of embarrassment onStuarts brown cheeks. Until the previous summer, Stuart had courted India Wilkes with theapprobation of both families and the entire County. The County felt that perhaps the cool andcontained India Wilkes would have a quieting effect on him. They fervently hoped so, at any rate.

And Stuart might have made the match, but Brent had not been satisfied. Brent liked India but hethought her mighty plain and tame, and he simply could not fall in love with her himself to keepStuart company. That was the first time the twins interest had ever diverged, and Brent wasresentful of his brothers attentions to a girl who seemed to him not at all remarkable.

Then, last summer at a political speaking in a grove of oak trees at Jonesboro, they bothsuddenly became aware of Scarlett OHara. They had known her for years, and, since theirchildhood, she had been a favorite playmate, for she could ride horses and climb trees almost as well as they. But now to their amazement she had become a grown-up young lady and quite themost charming one in all the world.

They noticed for the first time how her green eyes danced, how deep her dimples were when shelaughed, how tiny her hands and feet and what a small waist she had. Their clever remarks sent herinto merry peals of laughter and, inspired by the thought that she considered them a remarkablepair, they fairly outdid themselves.

It was a memorable day in the life of the twins. Thereafter, when they talked it over, they alwayswondered just why they had failed to notice Scarletts charms before. They never arrived at thecorrect answer, which was that Scarlett on that day had decided to make them notice. She wasconstitutionally unable to endure any man being in love with any woman not herself, and the sightof India Wilkes and Stuart at the speaking had been too much for her predatory nature. Not contentwith Stuart alone, she had set her cap for Brent as well, and with a thoroughness that overwhelmedthe two of them.

Now they were both in love with her, and India Wilkes and Letty Munroe, from Lovejoy, whomBrent had been half-heartedly courting, were far in the back of their minds. Just what the loserwould do, should Scarlett accept either one of them, the twins did not ask. They would cross thatbridge when they came to it. For the present they were quite satisfied to be in accord again aboutone girl, for they had no jealousies between them. It was a situation which interested the neighborsand annoyed their mother, who had no liking for Scarlett.

It will serve you right if that sly piece does accept one of you, she said. Or maybe shellaccept both of you, and then youll have to move to Utah, if the Mormonsll have youwhich Idoubt. ... All that bothers me is that some one of these days youre both going to get lickered upand jealous of each other about that two-faced, little, green-eyed baggage, and youll shoot eachother. But that might not be a bad idea either.

Since the day of the speaking, Stuart had been uncomfortable in Indias presence. Not that Indiaever reproached him or even indicated by look or gesture that she was aware of his abruptlychanged allegiance. She was too much of a lady. But Stuart felt guilty and ill at ease with her. Heknew he had made India love him and he knew that she still loved him and, deep in his heart, hehad the feeling that he had not played the gentleman. He still liked her tremendously and respectedher for her cool good breeding, her book learning and all the sterling qualities she possessed. But,damn it, she was just so pallid and uninteresting and always the same, beside Scarletts bright andchangeable charm. You always knew where you stood with India and you never had the slightestnotion with Scarlett. That was enough to drive a man to distraction, but it had its charm.

Well, lets go over to Cade Calverts and have supper. Scarlett said Cathleen was home fromCharleston. Maybe shell have some news about Fort Sumter that we havent heard.

Not Cathleen. Ill lay you two to one she didnt even know the fort was out there in the harbor,much less that it was full of Yankees until we shelled them out. All shell know about is the ballsshe went to and the beaux she collected.

Well, its fun to hear her gabble. And itll be somewhere to hide out till Ma has gone to bed.

Well, hell! I like Cathleen and she is fun and Id like to hear about Caro Rhett and the rest of the Charleston folks; but Im damned if I can stand sitting through another meal with that Yankeestepmother of hers.

Dont be too hard on her, Stuart. She means well.

Im not being hard on her. I feel sorry for her, but I dont like people Ive got to feel sorry for.

And she fusses around so much, trying to do the right thing and make you feel at home, that shealways manages to say and do just exactly the wrong thing. She gives me the fidgets! And shethinks Southerners wild barbarians. She even told Ma so. Shes afraid of Southerners. Wheneverweretheres(are) he always looks scared to death. She reminds me of a skinny hen perchedon a chair, her eyes kind of bright and blank and scared, all ready to flap and squawk at theslightest move anybody makes.

Well, you cant blame her. You did shoot Cade in the leg.

Well, I was lickered up or I wouldnt have done it, said Stuart. And Cade never had any hardfeelings. Neither did Cathleen or Raiford or Mr. Calvert. It was just that Yankee stepmother whosqualled and said I was a wild barbarian and decent people werent safe around uncivilizedSoutherners.

Well, you cant blame her. Shes a Yankee and aint got very good manners; and, after all, youdid shoot him and he is her stepson.

Well, hell! Thats no excuse for insulting me! You are Mas own blood son, but did she take onthat time Tony Fontaine shot you in the leg? No, she just sent for old Doc Fontaine to dress it andasked the doctor what ailed Tonys aim. Said she guessed licker was spoiling his marksmanship.

Remember how mad that made Tony?

Both boys yelled with laughter.

Mas a card! said Brent with loving approval. You can always count on her to do the rightthing and not embarrass you in front of folks.

Yes, but shes mighty liable to talk embarrassing in front of Father and the girls when we gethome tonight, said Stuart gloomily. Look, Brent. I guess this means we dont go to Europe. Youknow Mother said if we got expelled from another college we couldnt have our Grand Tour.

Well, hell! We dont care, do we? What is there to see in Europe? Ill bet those foreigners cantshow us a thing we havent got right here in Georgia. Ill bet their horses arent as fast or their girlsas pretty, and I know damn well they havent got any rye whisky that can touch Fathers.

Ashley Wilkes said they had an awful lot of scenery and music. Ashley liked Europe. Hesalways talking about it.

Wellyou know how the Wilkes are. They are kind of queer about music and books andscenery. Mother says its because their grandfather came from Virginia. She says Virginians setquite a store by such things.

They can have em. Give me a good horse to ride and some good licker to drink and a good girlto court and a bad girl to have fun with and anybody can have their Europe. ... What do we careabout missing the Tour? Suppose we were in Europe now, with the war coming on? We couldntget home soon enough. Id heap rather go to a war than go to Europe.

So would I, any day. ... Look, Brent! I know where we can go for supper. Lets ride across theswamp to Abel Wynders place and tell him were all four home again and ready for drill.

Thats an idea! cried Brent with enthusiasm. And we can hear all the news of the Troop andfind out what color they finally decided on for the uniforms.

If its Zouave, Im damned if Ill go in the troop. Id feel like a sissy in those baggy red pants.

They look like ladies red flannel drawers to me.

Is yall aimin ter go ter Mist Wynders? Cause ef you is, you ain gwine git much supper,

said Jeems. Dey cook done died, an dey ain bought a new one. Dey got a feel han cookin, an

de niggers tells me she is de wustest cook in de state.

Good God! Why dont they buy another cook?

Huccome po wite trash buy any niggers? Dey ain never owned mon fo at de mostes.

There was frank contempt in Jeems voice. His own social status was assured because theTarletons owned a hundred negroes and, like all slaves of large planters, he looked down on smallfarmers whose slaves were few.

Im going to beat your hide off for that, cried Stuart fiercely. Dont you call Abel Wynderpo white. Sure hes poor, but he aint trash; and Im damned if Ill have any man, darky orWhite, throwing off on him. There aint a better man in this County, or why else did the Troopelect him lieutenant?

Ah ain never figgered dat out, mahseff, replied Jeems, undisturbed by his masters scowl.

Look ter me lak deyd lect all de awficers frum rich gempmum, stead of swamp trash.

He aint trash! Do you mean to compare him with real white trash like the Slatterys? Abel justaint rich. Hes a small farmer, not a big planter, and if the boys thought enough of him to elect himlieutenant, then its not for any darky to talk impudent about him. The Troop knows what itsdoing.

The troop of cavalry had been organized three months before, the very day that Georgia secededfrom the union, and since then the recruits had been whistling for war. The outfit was as yetunnamed, though not for want of suggestions. Everyone had his own idea on that subject and wasloath to relinquish it, just as everyone had ideas about the color and cut of the uniforms. ClaytonWild Cats, Fire Eaters, North Georgia Hussars, Zouaves, The Inland Rifles (although theTroop was to be armed with pistols, sabers and bowie knives, and not with rifles), The ClaytonGrays, The Blood and Thunderers, The Rough and Readys, all had their adherents. Untilmatters were settled, everyone referred to the organization as the Troop and, despite the high-sounding name finally adopted, they were known to the end of their usefulness simply as TheTroop.

The officers were elected by the members, for no one in the County had had any militaryexperience except a few veterans of the Mexican and Seminole wars and, besides, the Troop wouldhave scorned a veteran as a leader if they had not personally liked him and trusted him. Everyoneliked the four Tarleton boys and the three Fontaines, but regretfully refused to elect them, becausethe Tarletons got lickered up too quickly and liked to skylark, and the Fontaines had such quick, murderous tempers. Ashley Wilkes was elected captain, because he was the best rider in theCounty and because his cool head was counted on to keep some semblance of order. RaifordCalvert was made first lieutenant, because everybody liked Raif, and Abel Wynder, son of aswamp trapper, himself a small farmer, was elected second lieutenant.

Abel was a shrewd, grave giant, illiterate, kind of heart, older than the other boys and with asgood or better manners in the presence of ladies. There was little snobbery in the Troop. Too manyof their fathers and grandfathers had come up to wealth from the small farmer class for that.

Moreover, Abel was the best shot in the Troop, a real sharpshooter who could pick out the eye of asquirrel at seventy-five yards, and, too, he knew all about living outdoors, building fires in the rain,tracking animals and finding water. The Troop bowed to real worth and moreover, because theyliked him, they made him an officer. He bore the honor gravely and with no untoward conceit, asthough it were only his due. But the planters ladies and the planters slaves could not overlook thefact that he was not born a gentleman, even if their men folks could.

In the beginning, the Troop had been recruited exclusively from the of planters, agentlemans outfit, each supplying his own horse,arms,equipment,unif(sons) orm and body servant.Butrichplanterswere(man) few in the young county of Clayton, and, in order to muster a full-strength troop, it had been necessary to raise more recruits among the sons of small farmers,hunters in the backwoods, swamp trappers, Crackers and, in a very few cases, even poor whites, ifthey were above the average of their class.

These latter young men were as anxious to fight the Yankees, should war come, as were theirricher neighbors; but the delicate question of money arose. Few small farmers owned horses. Theycarried on their farm operations with mules and they had no surplus of these, seldom more thanfour. The mules could not be spared to go off to war, even if they had been acceptable for theTroop, which they emphatically were not. As for the poor whites, they considered themselves welloff if they owned one mule. The backwoods folks and the swamp dwellers owned neither horsesnor mules. They lived entirely off the produce of their lands and the game in the swamp,conducting their business generally by the barter system and seldom seeing five dollars in cash ayear, and horses and uniforms were out of their reach. But they were as fiercely proud in theirpoverty as the planters were in their wealth, and they would accept nothing that smacked of charityfrom their rich neighbors. So, to save the feelings of all and to bring the Troop up to full strength,Scarletts father, John Wilkes, Buck Munroe, Jim Tarleton, Hugh Calvert, in fact every largeplanter in the County with the one exception of Angus Macintosh, had contributed money to completelyoutfit the Troop, horse and man. The upshot of the matter was that every planter agreed topay for equipping his own sons and a certain number of the others, but the manner of handling thearrangements was such that the less wealthy members of the outfit could accept horses anduniforms without offense to their honor.

The Troop met twice a week in Jonesboro to drill and to pray for the war to begin. Arrangementshad not yet been completed for obtaining the full quota of horses, but those who had horsesperformed what they imagined to be cavalry maneuvers in the field behind the courthouse, kickedup a great deal of dust, yelled themselves hoarse and waved the Revolutionary-war swords that hadbeen taken down from parlor walls. Those who, as yet, had no horses sat on the curb in front ofBullards store and watched their mounted comrades, chewed tobacco and told yarns. Or else engaged in shooting matches. There need to teach any of the men to shoot. Most Southernerswerebornwithgunsintheirha(was) nds,(no) and lives spent in hunting had made marksmen ofthem all.

From planters homes and swamp cabins, a varied array of firearms came to each muster. Therewere long squirrel guns that had been new when first the Alleghenies were crossed, old muzzle-loaders that had claimed many an Indian when Georgia was new, horse pistols that had seenservice in 1812, in the Seminole wars and in Mexico, silver-mounted dueling pistols, pocketderringers, double-barreled hunting pieces and handsome new rifles of English make with shiningstocks of fine wood.

Drill always ended in the saloons of Jonesboro, and by nightfall so many fights had broken outthat the officers were hard put to ward off casualties until the Yankees could inflict them. It wasduring one of these brawls that Stuart Tarleton had shot Cade Calvert and Tony Fontaine had shotBrent. The twins had been at home, freshly expelled from the University of Virginia, at the timethe Troop was organized and they had joined enthusiastically; but after the shooting episode, twomonths ago, their mother had packed them off to the state university, with orders to stay there.

They had sorely missed the excitement of the drills while away, and they counted education welllost if only they could ride and yell and shoot off rifles in the company of their friends.

Well, lets cut across country to Abels, suggested Brent. We can go through Mr. OHarasriver bottom and the Fontaines pasture and get there in no time.

We ain gwine git nothin ter eat cept possum an greens, argued Jeems.

You aint going to get anything, grinned Stuart Because you are going home and tell Ma thatwe wont be home for supper.

No, Ah ain! cried Jeems in alarm. No, Ah ain! Ah doan git no mo fun outer havin MissBeetriss lay me out dan yall does. Fust place shell ast me huccome Ah let yall git expelled agin.

An nex thing, huccome Ah din bring yall home ternight so she could lay you out An den shelllight on me lak a duck on a June bug, an fust thing Ah know Ahll be ter blame fer it all. Ef yalldoan tek me ter Mist Wynders, Ahll lay out in de woods all night an maybe de patterollers gitme, cause Ah heap ruther de patterollers git me dan Miss Beetriss when she in a state.

The twins looked at the determined black boy in perplexity and indignation.

Hed be just fool enough to let the patterollers get him and that would give Ma something elseto talk about for weeks. I swear, darkies are more trouble. Sometimes I think the Abolitionists havegot the right idea.

Well, it wouldnt be right to make Jeems face what we dont want to face. Well have to takehim. But, look, you impudent black fool, if you put on any airs in front of the Wynder darkies andhint that we all the time have fried chicken and ham, while they dont have nothing but rabbit andpossum, IllIll tell Ma. And we wont let you go to the war with us, either.

Airs? Me put on airs fo dem cheap niggers? Nawsuh, Ah got better manners. Ain MissBeetriss taught me manners same as she taught yall?

She didnt do a very good job on any of the three of us, said Stuart. Come on, lets get going.

He backed his big red horse and then, putting spurs to his side, lifted him easily over the splitrail fence into the soft field of Gerald OHaras plantation. Brents horse followed and then Jeems,with Jeems clinging to pommel and mane. Jeems did not like to jump fences, but he had jumpedhigher ones than this in order to keep up with his masters.

As they picked their way across the red furrows and down the hill to the river bottom in thedeepening dusk, Brent yelled to his brother:

Look, Stu! Dont it seem like to you that Scarlett would have asked us to supper?

I kept thinking she would, yelled Stuart Why do you suppose ...

Chapter 2

WHEN THE TWINS left Scarlett standing on the porch of Tara and the last sound of flyinghooves had died away, she went back to her chair like a sleepwalker. Her face felt stiff as frompain and her mouth actually hurt from having stretched it, unwillingly, in smiles to prevent thetwins from learning her secret. She sat down wearily, tucking one foot under her, and her heartswelled up with misery, until it felt too large for her bosom. It beat with odd little jerks; her handswere cold, and a feeling of disaster oppressed her. There were pain and bewilderment in her face,the bewilderment of a pampered child who has always had her own way for the asking and whonow, for the first time, was in contact with the unpleasantness of life.

Ashley to marry Melanie Hamilton!

Oh, it couldnt be true! The twins were mistaken. They were playing one of their jokes on her.

Ashley couldnt, couldnt be in love with her. Nobody could, not with a mousy little person likeMelanie. Scarlett recalled with contempt Melanies thin childish figure, her serious heart-shapedface that was plain almost to homeliness. And Ashley couldnt have seen her in months. He hadntbeen in Atlanta more than twice since the house party he gave last year at Twelve Oaks. No,Ashley couldnt be in love with Melanie, becauseoh, she couldnt be mistaken!because hewas in love with her! She, Scarlett, was the one he lovedshe knew it!

Scarlett heard Mammys lumbering tread shaking the floor of the hall and she hastily untuckedher foot and tried to rearrange her face in more placid lines. It would never do for Mammy tosuspect that anything was wrong. Mammy felt that she owned the OHaras, body and soul, thattheir secrets were her secrets; and even a hint of a mystery was enough to set her upon the trail asrelentlessly as a bloodhound. Scarlett knew from experience that, if Mammys curiosity were notimmediately satisfied, she would take up the matter with Ellen, and then Scarlett would be forcedto reveal everything to her mother, or think up some plausible lie.

Mammy emerged from the hall, a huge old woman with the small, shrewd eyes of an elephant.

She was shining black, pure African, devoted to her last drop of blood to the OHaras, Ellensmainstay, the despair of her three daughters, the terror of the other house servants. Mammy wasblack, but her code of conduct and her sense of pride were as high as or higher than those of herowners. She had been raised in the bedroom of Solange Robillard, Ellen OHaras mother, a dainty, cold, high-nosed Frenchwoman, who spared neither her children nor her servants their justpunishment for any infringement of decorum. She had been Ellens mammy and had come withher from Savannah to the up-country when she married. Whom Mammy loved, she chastened.

And, as her love for Scarlett and her pride in her were enormous, the chastening process waspractically continuous.

Is de gempmum gone? Huccome you din ast dem ter stay fer supper, Miss Scarlett? Ah donetole Poke ter lay two extry plates fer dem. Whars yo manners?

Oh, I was so tired of hearing them talk about the war that I couldnt have endured it throughsupper, especially with Pa joining in and shouting about Mr. Lincoln.

You ain got no mo manners dan a feel han, an affer Miss Ellen an me done labored widyou. An hyah you is widout yo shawl! An de night air fixin ter set in! Ah done tole you an toleyou bout gittin fever frum settin in de night air wid nuthin on yo shoulders. Come on in dehouse, Miss Scarlett.

Scarlett turned away from Mammy with studied nonchalance, thankful that her face had beenunnoticed in Mammys preoccupation with the matter of the shawl.

No, I want to sit here and watch the sunset. Its so pretty. You run get my shawl. Please,Mammy, and Ill sit here till Pa comes home.

Yo voice soun lak you catchin a cole, said Mammy suspiciously.

Well, Im not, said Scarlett Impatiently. You fetch me my shawl.

Mammy waddled back into the hall and Scarlett heard her call softly up the stairwell to theupstairs maid.

You, Rosa! Drap me Miss Scarletts shawl. Then, more loudly: Wuthless nigger! She ain

never whar she does nobody no good. Now, Ah got ter climb up an git it mahseff.

Scarlett heard the stairs groan and she got softly to her feet. When Mammy returned she wouldresume her lecture on Scarletts breach of hospitality, and Scarlett felt that she could not endureprating about such a trivial matter when her heart was breaking. As she stood, hesitant, wonderingwhere she could hide until the ache in her breast subsided a little, a thought came to her, bringing asmall ray of hope. Her father had ridden over to Twelve Oaks, the Wilkes plantation, that afternoonto offer to buy Dilcey, the broad wife of his valet, Pork. Dilcey was head woman and midwife atTwelve Oaks, and, since the marriage six months ago, Pork had deviled his master night and day tobuy Dilcey, so the two could live on the same plantation. That afternoon, Gerald, his resistanceworn thin, had set out to make an offer for Dilcey.

Surely, thought Scarlett, Pa will know whether this awful story is true. Even if he hasnt actuallyheard anything this afternoon, perhaps hes noticed something, sensed some excitement in theWilkes family. If I can just see him privately before supper, perhaps Ill find out the truththat itsjust one of the twins nasty practical jokes.

It was time for Geralds return and, if she expected to see him alone, there was nothing for her todo except meet him where the driveway entered the road. She went quietly down the front steps,looking carefully over her shoulder to make sure Mammy was not observing her from the upstairs windows. Seeing no broad black face, turbaned in snowy white, peering disapprovingly from betweenfluttering curtains, she boldly snatched up her green flowered skirts and sped down the pathtoward the driveway as fast as her small ribbon-laced slippers would carry her.

The dark cedars on either side of the graveled drive met in an arch overhead, turning the longavenue into a dim tunnel. As soon as she was beneath the gnarled arms of the cedars, she knew shewas safe from observation from the house and she slowed her swift pace. She was panting, for herstays were laced too tightly to permit much running, but she walked on as rapidly as she could.

Soon she was at the end of the driveway and out on the main road, but she did not stop until shehad rounded a curve that put a large clump of trees between her and the house.

Flushed and breathing hard, she sat down on a stump to wait for her father. It was past time forhim to come home, but she was glad that he was late. The delay would give her time to quiet herbreathing and calm her face so that his suspicions would not be aroused. Every moment sheexpected to hear the pounding of his horses hooves and see him come charging up the hill at hisusual breakneck speed. But the minutes slipped by and Gerald did not come. She looked down theroad for him, the pain in her heart swelling up again.

Oh, it cant be true! she thought. Why doesnt he come?

Her eyes followed the winding road, blood-red now after the morning rain. In her thought shetraced its course as it ran down the hill to the sluggish Flint River, through the tangled swampybottoms and up the next hill to Twelve Oaks where Ashley lived. That was all the road meant nowa road to Ashley and the beautiful white-columned house that crowned the hill like a GreekTemple.

Oh, Ashley! Ashley! she thought, and her heart beat faster.

Some of the cold sense of bewilderment and disaster that had weighted her down since theTarleton boys told her their gossip was pushed into the background of her mind, and in its placecrept the fever that had possessed her for two years.

It seemed strange now that when she was growing up Ashley had never seemed so veryattractive to her. In childhood days, she had seen him come and go and never given him a thought.

But since that day two years ago when Ashley, newly home from his three years Grand Tour inEurope, had called to pay his respects, she had loved him. It was as simple as that.

She had been on the front porch and he had ridden up the long avenue, dressed in graybroadcloth with a wide black cravat setting off his frilled shirt to perfection. Even now, she couldrecall each detail of his dress, how brightly his boots shone, the head of a Medusa in cameo on hiscravat phi, the wide Panama hat that was instantly in his hand when he saw her. He had alightedand tossed his bridle reins to a pickaninny and stood looking up at her, his drowsy gray eyes widewith a smile and the sun so bright on his blond hair that it seemed like a cap of shining silver. Andhe said, So youve grown up, Scarlett. And, coming lightly up the steps, he had kissed her hand.

And his voice! She would never forget the leap of her heart as she heard it, as if for the first time,drawling, resonant, musical.

She had wanted him, in that first instant, wanted him as simply and unreasoningly as she wantedfood to eat, horses to ride and a soft bed on which to lay herself.

For two years he had squired her about the County, to balls, fish fries, picnics and court days,never so often as the Tarleton twins or Cade Calvert, never so importunate as the younger Fontaineboys, but, still, never the week went by that Ashley did not come calling at Tara.

True, he never made love to her, nor did the clear gray eyes ever glow with that hot light Scarlettknew so well in other men. And yetand yetshe knew he loved her. She could not be mistakenabout it. Instinct stronger than reason and knowledge born of experience told her that he loved her.

Too often she had surprised him when his eyes were neither drowsy nor remote, when he looked ather with a yearning and a sadness which puzzled her. She knew he loved her. Why did he not tellher so? That she could not understand. But there were so many things about him that she did notunderstand.

He was courteous always, but aloof, remote. No one could ever tell what he was thinking about,Scarlett least of all. In a neighborhood where everyone said exactly what he thought as soon as hethought it, Ashleys quality of reserve was exasperating. He was as proficient as any of the otheryoung men in the usual County diversions, hunting, gambling, dancing and politics, and was thebest rider of them all; but he differed from all the rest in that these pleasant activities were not theend and aim of life to him. And he stood alone in his interest in books and music and his fondnessfor writing poetry.

Oh, why was he so handsomely blond, so courteously aloof, so maddeningly boring with his talkabout Europe and books and music and poetry and things that interested her not at alland yet sodesirable? Night after night, when Scarlett went to bed after sitting on the front porch in the semidarknesswith him, she tossed restlessly for hours and comforted herself only with the thought thatthe very next time he saw her he certainly would propose. But the next time came and went, andthe result was nothingnothing except that the fever possessing her rose higher and hotter.

She loved him and she wanted him and she did not understand him. She was as forthright andsimple as the winds that blew over Tara and the yellow river that wound about it, and to the end ofher days she would never be able to understand a complexity. And now, for the first time in herlife, she was facing a complex nature.

For Ashley was born of a line of men who used their leisure for thinking, not doing, for spinningbrightly colored dreams that had in them no touch of reality. He moved in an inner world that wasmore beautiful than Georgia and came back to reality with reluctance. He looked on people, and heneither liked nor disliked them. He looked on life and was neither heartened nor saddened. Heaccepted the universe and his place in it for what they were and, shrugging, turned to his music andbooks and his better world.

Why he should have captivated Scarlett when his mind was a stranger to hers she did not know.

The very mystery of him excited her curiosity like a door that had neither lock nor key. The thingsabout him which she could not understand only made her love him more, and his odd, restrainedcourtship only served to increase her determination to have him for her own. That he wouldpropose some day she had never doubted, for she was too young and too spoiled ever to haveknown defeat. And now, like a thunderclap, had come this horrible news. Ashley to marry Melanie!

It couldnt be true!

Why, only last week, when they were riding home at twilight from Fairhill, he had said:

Scarlett, I have something so important to tell you that I hardly know how to say it.

She had cast down her eyes demurely, her heart beating with wild pleasure, thinking the happymoment had come. Then he had said: Not now! Were nearly home and there isnt time. Oh,Scarlett, what a coward I am! And putting spurs to his horse, he had raced her up the hill to Tara.

Scarlett, sitting on the stump, thought of those words which had made her so happy, andsuddenly they took on another meaning, a hideous meaning. Suppose it was the news of hisengagement he had intended to tell her!

Oh, if Pa would only come home! She could not endure the suspense another moment Shelooked impatiently down the road again, and again she was disappointed. The sun was now belowthe horizon and the red glow at the rim of the world faded into pink. The sky above turned slowlyfrom azure to the delicate blue-green of a robins egg, and the unearthly stillness of rural twilightcame stealthily down about her. Shadowy dimness crept over the countryside. The red furrows andthe gashed red road lost their magical blood color and became plain brown earth. Across the road,in the pasture, the horses, mules and cows stood quietly with heads over the split-rail fence,waiting to be driven to the stables and supper. They did not like the dark shade of the thicketshedging the pasture creek, and they twitched their ears at Scarlett as if appreciative of humancompanionship.

In the strange half-light, the tall pines of the river swamp, so warmly green in the sunshine, wereblack against the pastel sky, an impenetrable row of black giants hiding the slow yellow water attheir feet. On the hill across the river, the tall white chimneys of the Wilkes, home faded graduallyinto the darkness of the thick oaks surrounding them, and only far-off pin points of supper lampsshowed that a house was here. The warm damp balminess of spring encompassed her sweetly withthe moist smells of new-plowed earth and all the fresh green things pushing up to the air.

Sunset and spring and new-fledged greenery were no miracle to Scarlett. Their beauty sheaccepted as casually as the air she breathed and the water she drank, for she had never consciouslyseen beauty in anything bat womens faces, horses, silk dresses and like tangible things. Yet theserene half-light over Taras well-kept acres brought a measure of quiet to her disturbed mind. Sheloved this land so much, without even knowing she loved it, loved it as she loved her mothers faceunder the lamp at prayer time.

Still there was no sign of Gerald on the quiet winding road. If she had to wait much longer,Mammy would certainly come in search of her and bully her into the house. But even as shestrained her eyes down the darkening road, she heard a pounding of hooves at the bottom of thepasture hill and saw the horses and cows scatter in fright. Gerald OHara was coming home acrosscountry and at top speed.

He came up the hill at a gallop on his thick-barreled, long-legged hunter, appearing in thedistance like a boy on a too large horse. His long white hair standing out behind him, he urged thehorse forward with crop and loud cries.

Filled with her own anxieties, she nevertheless watched him with affectionate pride, for Geraldwas an excellent horseman.

I wonder why he always wants to jump fences when hes had a few drinks, she thought. And after that fall he had right here last year when he broke his knee. Youd think hed learn. Especiallywhen he promised Mother on oath hed never jump again.

Scarlett had no awe of her father and felt him more her contemporary than her sisters, forjumping fences and keeping it a secret from his wife gave him a boyish pride and guilty glee thatmatched her own pleasure in outwitting Mammy. She rose from her seat to watch him.

The big horse reached the fence, gathered himself and soared over as effortlessly as a bird, hisrider yelling enthusiastically, his crop beating the air, his white curls jerking out behind him.

Gerald did not see his daughter in the shadow of the trees, and he drew rein in the road, patting hishorses neck with approbation.

Theres none in the County can touch you, nor in the state, he informed his mount, with pride,the brogue of County Meath still heavy on his tongue in spite of thirty-nine years in America. Thenhe hastily set about smoothing his hair and settling his ruffled shirt and his cravat which hadslipped awry behind one ear. Scarlett knew these hurried preenings were being made with an eyetoward meeting his wife with the appearance of a gentleman who had ridden sedately home from acall on a neighbor. She knew also that he was presenting her with just the opportunity she wantedfor opening the conversation without revealing her true purpose.

She laughed aloud. As she had intended, Gerald was startled by the sound; then he recognizedher, and a look both sheepish and defiant came over his florid face. He dismounted with difficulty,because his knee was stiff, and, slipping the reins over his arm, stumped toward her.

Well, Missy, he said, pinching her cheek, so, youve been spying on me and, like your sisterSuellen last week, youll be telling your mother on me?

There was indignation in his hoarse bass voice but also a wheedling note, and Scarlett teasinglyclicked her tongue against her teeth as she reached out to pull his cravat into place. His breath inher face was strong with Bourbon whisky mingled with a faint fragrance of mint. Accompanyinghim also were the smells of chewing tobacco, well-oiled leather and horsesa combination ofodors that she always associated with her father and instinctively liked in other men.

No, Pa, Im no tattletale like Suellen, she assured him, standing off to view his rearrangedattire with a judicious air.

Gerald was a small man, little more than five feet tall, but so heavy of barrel and thick of neckthat his appearance, when seated, led strangers to think him a larger man. His thickset torso wassupported by short sturdy legs, always incased in the finest leather boots procurable and alwaysplanted wide apart like a swaggering small boys. Most small people who take themselvesseriously are a little ridiculous; but the bantam cock is respected in the barnyard, and so it was withGerald. No one would ever have the temerity to think of Gerald OHara as a ridiculous little figure.

He was sixty years old and his crisp curly hair was silver-white, but his shrewd face was unlinedand his hard little blue eyes were young with the unworried youthfulness of one who has nevertaxed his brain with problems more abstract than how many cards to draw in a poker game. Hiswas as Irish a face as could be found in the length and breadth of the homeland he had left so longagoround, high colored, short nosed, wide mouthed and belligerent.

Beneath his choleric exterior Gerald OHara had the tenderest of hearts. He could not bear to see a slave pouting under a reprimand, ho matter how well deserved, or hear a kitten mewing or achild crying; but he had a horror of having this weakness discovered. That everyone who met himdid discover his kindly heart within five minutes was unknown to him; and his vanity would havesuffered tremendously if he had found it out, for he liked to think that when he bawled orders atthe top of his voice everyone trembled and obeyed. It had never occurred to him that only onevoice was obeyed on the plantationthe soft voice of his wife Ellen. It was a secret he wouldnever learn, for everyone from Ellen down to the stupidest field hand was in a tacit and kindlyconspiracy to keep him believing that his word was law.

Scarlett was impressed less than anyone else by his tempers and his roarings. She was his oldestchild and, now that Gerald knew there would be no more sons to follow the three who lay in thefamily burying ground, he had drifted into a habit of treating her in a man-to-man manner whichshe found most pleasant. She was more like her father than her younger sisters, for Carreen, whohad been born Caroline Irene, was delicate and dreamy, and Suellen, christened Susan Elinor,prided herself on her elegance and ladylike deportment.

Moreover, Scarlett and her father were bound together by a mutual suppression agreement. IfGerald caught her climbing a fence instead of walking half a mile to a gate, or sitting too late onthe front steps with a beau, he castigated her personally and with vehemence, but he did notmention the fact to Ellen or to Mammy. And when Scarlett discovered him jumping fences after hissolemn promise to his wife, or learned the exact amount of his losses at poker, as she always didfrom County gossip, she refrained from mentioning the fact at the supper table in the artfullyartless manner Suellen had. Scarlett and her father each assured the other solemnly that to bringsuch matters to the ears of Ellen would only hurt her, and nothing would induce them to wound hergentleness.

Scarlett looked at her father in the fading light, and, without knowing why, she found itcomforting to be in his presence. There was something vital and earthy and coarse about him thatappealed to her. Being the least analytic of people, she did not realize that this was because shepossessed in some degree these same qualities, despite sixteen years of effort on the part of Ellenand Mammy to obliterate them.

You look very presentable now, she said, and I dont think anyone will suspect youve beenup to your tricks unless you brag about them. But it does seem to me that after you broke yourknee last year, jumping that same fence

Well, may I be damned if Ill have me own daughter telling me what I shall jump and notjump, he shouted, giving her cheek another pinch. Its me own neck, so it is. And besides, Missy,what are you doing out here without your shawl?

Seeing that he employing familiar maneuvers to extricate himself from unpleasant conversation,sheslippe(was) d her arm through his and said: I was waiting for you. I didnt know youwould be so late. I just wondered if you had bought Dilcey.

Bought her I did, and the price has ruined me. Bought her and her little wench, Prissy. JohnWilkes was for almost giving them away, but never will I have it said that Gerald OHara usedfriendship in a trade. I made him take three thousand for the two of them.

In the name of Heaven, Pa, three thousand! And you didnt need to buy Prissy!

Has the time when own daughters sit in judgment on me? shouted Gerald rhetorically. Prissy is a l(come) ikely little w(me) ench and so

I know her. Shes a sly, stupid creature, Scarlett rejoined calmly, unimpressed by his uproar.

And the only reason you bought her was because Dilcey asked you to buy her.

Gerald looked crestfallen and embarrassed, as always when caught in a kind deed, and Scarlettlaughed outright at his transparency.

Well, what if I did? Was there any use buying Dilcey if she was going to mope about the child?

Well, never again will I let a darky on this place marry off it. Its too expensive. Well, come on,Puss, lets go in to supper.

The shadows were falling thicker now, the last greenish tinge had left the sky and a slight chillwas displacing the balminess of spring. But Scarlett loitered, wondering how to bring up thesubject of Ashley without permitting Gerald to suspect her motive. This was difficult, for Scarletthad not a subtle bone in her body; and Gerald was so much like her he never failed to penetrate herweak subterfuges, even as she penetrated his. And he was seldom tactful in doing it.

How are they all over at Twelve Oaks?

About as usual. Cade Calvert was there and, after I settled about Dilcey, we all set on thegallery and had several toddies. Cade has just come from Atlanta, and its all upset they are thereand talking war and

Scarlett sighed. If Gerald once got on the subject of war and secession, it would be hours beforehe relinquished it She broke in with another line.

Did they say anything about the barbecue tomorrow?

Now that I think of it they did. Misswhats-her-namethe sweet little thing who was herelast year, you know, Ashleys cousinoh, yes, Miss Melanie Hamilton, thats the nameshe andher brother Charles have already come from Atlanta and

Oh, so she did come?

She did, and a sweet quiet thing she is, with never a word to say for herself, like a womanshould be. Come now, daughter, dont lag. Your mother will be hunting for us.

Scarletts heart sank at the news. She had hoped against hope that something would keepMelanie Hamilton in Atlanta where she belonged, and the knowledge that even her father approvedof her sweet quiet nature, so different from her own, forced her into the open.

Was Ashley there, too?

He was. Gerald let go of his daughters arm and turned, peering sharply into her face. And ifthats why you came out here to wait for me, why didnt you say so without beating around thebush?

Scarlett could think of nothing to say, and she felt her face growing red with annoyance.

Well, speak up.

Still she said nothing, wishing that it was permissible to shake ones father and tell him to hushhis mouth.

He was there and he asked most kindly after you, as did his sisters, and said they hoped nothingwould keep you from the barbecue tomorrow. Ill warrant nothing will, he said shrewdly. Andnow, daughter, whats all this about you and Ashley?

There is nothing, she said shortly, tugging at his arm. Lets go in, Pa.

So now tis you wanting to go in, he observed. But here Im going to stand till Imunderstanding you. Now that I think of it tis strange youve been recently. Has he been triflingwith you? Has he asked to marry you?

No, she said shortly.

Nor will he, said Gerald.

Fury flamed in her, but Gerald waved her quiet with a hand.

Hold your tongue, Miss! I had it from John Wilkes this afternoon in the strictest confidence thatAshleys to marry Miss Melanie. Its to be announced tomorrow.

Scarletts hand fell from his arm. So it was true!

A pain slashed at her heart as savagely as a wild animals fangs. Through it all, she felt herfathers eyes on her, a little pitying, a little annoyed at being faced with a problem for which heknew no answer. He loved Scarlett, but it made him uncomfortable to have her forcing her childishproblems on him for a solution. Ellen knew all the answers. Scarlett should have taken her troublesto her.

Is it a spectacle youve been making of yourselfof all of us? he bawled, his voice rising asalways in moments of excitement. Have you been running after a man whos not in love with you,when you could have any of the bucks in the County?

Anger and hurt pride drove out some of the pain.

I havent been running after him. Itit just surprised me.

Its lying you are! said Gerald, and then, peering at her stricken face, he added in a burst ofkindliness: Im sorry, daughter. But after all, you are nothing but a child and theres lots of otherbeaux.

Mother was only fifteen when she married you, and Im sixteen, said Scarlett, her voicemuffled.

Your mother was different, said Gerald. She was never flighty like you. Now come, daughter,cheer up, and Ill take you to Charleston next week to visit your Aunt Eulalie and, what with all thehullabaloo they are having over there about Fort Sumter, youll be forgetting about Ashley in aweek.

He thinks Im a child, thought Scarlett, grief and anger choking utterance, and hes only gotto dangle a new toy and Ill forget my bumps.

Now, dont be jerking your chin at me, warned Gerald. If you had any sense youd have married Stuart or Brent Tarleton long ago. Think it over, daughter. Marry one of the twins and thenthe plantations will run together and Jim Tarleton and I will build you a fine house, right wherethey join, in that big pine grove and

Will you stop treating me like a child! cried Scarlett. I dont want to go to Charleston or havea house or marry the twins. I only want She caught herself but not in time.

Geralds voice was strangely quiet and he spoke slowly as if drawing his words from a store ofthought seldom used.

Its only Ashley youre wanting, and youll not be having him. And if he wanted to marry you,twould be with misgivings that Id say Yes, for an the fine friendship thats between me and JohnWilkes. And, seeing her startled look, he continued: I want my girl to be happy and you wouldntbe happy with him.

Oh, I would! I would!

That you would not, daughter. Only when like marries like can there be any happiness.

Scarlett had a sudden treacherous desire to cry out, But youve been happy, and you andMother arent alike, but she repressed it, fearing that he would box her ears for her impertinence.

Our people and the Wilkes are different, he went on slowly, fumbling for words. The Wilkesare different from any of our neighborsdifferent from any family I ever knew. They are queerfolk, and its best that they marry their cousins and keep their queerness to themselves.

Why, Pa, Ashley is not

Hold your whist, Puss! I said nothing against the lad, for I like him. And when I say queer, itsnot crazy Im meaning. Hes not queer like the Calverts whod gamble everything they have on ahorse, or the Tarletons who turn out a drunkard or two in every litter, or the Fontaines who are hotheadedlittle brutes and after murdering a man for a fancied slight. That kind of queerness is easyto understand, for sure, and but for the grace of God Gerald OHara would be having all thosefaults! And I dont mean that Ashley would run off with another woman, if you were his wife, orbeat you. Youd be happier if he did, for at least youd be understanding that. But hes queer inother ways, and theres no understanding him at all. I like him, but its neither heads nor tails I canmake of most he says. Now, Puss, tell me true, do you understand his folderol about books andpoetry and music and oil paintings and such foolishness?

Oh, Pa, cried Scarlett impatiently, if I married him, Id change all that!

Oh, you would, would you now? Said Gerald testily, shooting a sharp look at her. Then itslittle enough you are knowing of any man living, let alone Ashley. No wife has ever changed ahusband whit, and dont you be forgetting that. And as for changing a WilkesGodsnightgown,d(one) aughter! The whole family is that way, and theyve always been that way. Andprobably always will. I tell you theyre born queer. Look at the way they go tearing up to NewYork and Boston to hear operas and see oil paintings. And ordering French and German books bythe crate from the Yankees! And there they sit reading and dreaming the dear God knows what,when theyd be better spending their time hunting and playing poker as proper men should.

Theres nobody in the County sits a horse better than Ashley, said Scarlett, furious at the slur of effeminacy flung on Ashley, nobody except maybe his father. And as for poker, didnt Ashleytake two hundred dollars away from you just last week in Jonesboro?

The Calvert boys have been blabbing again, Gerald said resignedly, else youd not beknowing the amount. Ashley can ride with the best and play poker with the bestthats me, Puss!

And Im not denying that when he sets out to drink he can put even the Tarletons under the table.

He can do all those things, but his hearts not in it. Thats why I say hes queer.

Scarlett was silent and her heart sank. She could think of no defense for this last, for she knewGerald was right. Ashleys heart was in none of the pleasant things he did so well. He was nevermore than politely interested in any of the things that vitally interested every one else.

Rightly interpreting her silence, Gerald patted her arm and said triumphantly: There now,Scarlett! You admit tis true. What would you be doing with a husband like Ashley? Tismoonstruck they all are, all the Wilkes. And then, in a wheedling tone: When I was mentioningthe Tarletons the while ago, I wasnt pushing them. Theyre fine lads, but if its Cade Calvertyoure setting your cap after, why, tis the same with me. The Calverts are good folk, all of them,for all the old man marrying a Yankee. And when Im goneWhist, darlin, listen to me! Ill leaveTara to you and Cade

I wouldnt have Cade on a silver tray, cried Scarlett in fury. And I wish youd quit pushinghim at me! I dont want Tara or any old plantation. Plantations dont amount to anything when

She was going to say when you havent the man you want, but Gerald, incensed by thecavalier way in which she treated his proffered gift, the thing which, next to Ellen, he loved best inthe whole world uttered a roar.

Do you stand there, Scarlett OHara, and tell me that Tarathat landdoesnt amount toanything?

Scarlett nodded obstinately. Her heart was too sore to care whether or not she put her father in atemper.

Land is the only thing in the world that amounts to anything, he shouted, his thick, short armsmaking wide gestures of indignation, for tis the only thing in this world that lasts, and dont yoube forgetting it! Tis the only thing worth working for, worth fighting forworth dying for.

Oh, Pa, she said disgustedly, you talk like an Irishman!

Have I ever been ashamed of it? No, tis proud I am. And dont be forgetting that you are halfIrish, Miss! And to anyone with a drop of Irish blood in them the land they live on is like theirmother. Tis ashamed of you I am this minute. I offer you the most beautiful land in the worldsaving County Meath in the Old Countryand what do you do? You sniff!

Gerald had begun to work himself up into a pleasurable shouting rage when something inScarletts woebegone face stopped him.

But there, youre young. Twill come to you, this love of land. Theres no getting away from it,if youre Irish. Youre just a child and bothered about your beaux. When youre older, youll beseeing how tis. ... Now, do you be making up your mind about Cade or the twins or one of EvanMunroes young bucks, and see how fine I turn you out!

Oh, Pa!

By this time, Gerald was thoroughly tired of the conversation and thoroughly annoyed that theproblem should be upon his shoulders. He felt aggrieved, moreover, that Scarlett should still lookdesolate after being offered the best of the County boys and Tara, too. Gerald liked his gifts to bereceived with clapping of hands and kisses.

Now, none of your pouts, Miss. It doesnt matter who you marry, as long as he thinks like youand is a gentleman and a Southerner and prideful. For a woman, love comes after marriage.

Oh, Pa, thats such an Old Country notion!

And a good notion it is! All this American business of running around marrying for love, likeservants, like Yankees! The best marriages are when the parents choose for the girl. For how can asilly piece like yourself tell a good man from a scoundrel? Now, look at the Wilkes. Whats keptthem prideful and strong all these generations? Why, marrying the likes of themselves, marryingthe cousins their family always expects them to marry.

Oh, cried Scarlett, fresh pain striking her as Geralds words brought home the terribleinevitability of the truth. Gerald looked at her bowed head and shuffled his feet uneasily.

Its not crying you are? he questioned, fumbling clumsily at her chin, trying to turn her faceupward, his own face furrowed with pity.

No, she cried vehemently, jerking away.

Its lying you are, and Im proud of it. Im glad theres pride in you, Puss. And I want to seepride in you tomorrow at the barbecue. Ill not be having the County gossiping and laughing at youfor mooning your heart out about a man who never gave you a thought beyond friendship.

He did give me a thought, thought Scarlett, sorrowfully in her heart. Oh, a lot of thoughts! Iknow he did. I could tell. If Id just had a little longer, I know I could have made him sayOh, if itonly wasnt that the Wilkes always feel that they have to marry their cousins!

Gerald took her arm and passed it through his.

Well be going in to supper now, and all this is between us. Ill not be worrying your motherwith thisnor do you do it either. Blow your nose, daughter.

Scarlett blew her nose on her torn handkerchief, and they started up the dark drive arm in arm,the horse following slowly. Near the house, Scarlett was at the point of speaking again when shesaw her mother in the dim shadows of the porch. She had on her bonnet, shawl and mittens, andbehind her was Mammy, her face like a thundercloud, holding in her hand the black leather bag inwhich Ellen OHara always carried the bandages and medicines she used in doctoring the slaves.

Mammys lips were large and pendulous and, when indignant, she could push out her lower one totwice its normal length. It was pushed out now, and Scarlett knew that Mammy was seething oversomething of which she did not approve.

Mr. OHara, called Ellen as she saw the two coming up the drivewayEllen belonged to ageneration that was formal even after seventeen years of wedlock and the bearing of six childrenMr. OHara, there is illness at the Slattery house. Emmies baby has been born and is dying andmust be baptized. I am going there with Mammy to see what I can do.

Her voice was raised questioningly, as though she hung on Geralds assent to her plan, a mereformality but one dear to the heart of Gerald.

In the name of God! blustered Gerald. Why should those white trash take you away just atyour supper hour and just when Im wanting to tell you about the war talk thats going on inAtlanta! Go, Mrs. OHara. Youd not rest easy on your pillow the night if there was trouble abroadand you not there to help.

She doan never git no res on her piller fer hoppin up at night time nursin niggers an po witetrash dat could ten to deyseff, grumbled Mammy in a monotone as she went down the stairstoward the carriage which was waiting in the side drive.

Take my place at the table, dear, said Ellen, patting Scarletts cheek softly with a mittenedhand.

In spite of her choked-back tears, Scarlett thrilled to the never-failing magic of her motherstouch, to the faint fragrance of lemon verbena sachet that came from her rustling silk dress. ToScarlett, there was something breath-taking about Ellen OHara, a miracle that lived in the housewith her and awed her and charmed and soothed her.

Gerald helped his wife into the carriage and gave orders to the coachman to drive carefully.

Toby, who had handled Geralds horses for twenty years, pushed out his lips in mute indignation atbeing told how to conduct his own business. Driving off, with Mammy beside him, each was aperfect picture of pouting African disapproval.

If I didnt do so much for those trashy Slatterys that theyd have to pay money for elsewhere,

fumed Gerald, theyd be willing to sell me their miserable few acres of swamp bottom, and theCounty would be well rid of them. Then, brightening, in anticipation of one of his practical jokes:

Come daughter, lets go tell Pork that instead of buying Dilcey, Ive sold him to John Wilkes.

He tossed the reins of his horse to a small pickaninny standing near and started up the steps. Hehad already forgotten Scarletts heartbreak and his mind was only on plaguing his valet. Scarlettslowly climbed the steps after him, her feet leaden. She thought that, after all, a mating betweenherself and Ashley could be no queerer than that of her father and Ellen Robillard OHara. Asalways, she wondered how her loud, insensitive father had managed to marry a woman like hermother, for never were two people further apart in birth, breeding and habits of mind.

Chapter 3

ELLEN OHARA was thirty-two years old, and, according to the standards of her day, she was amiddle-aged woman, one who had borne six children and buried three. She was a tall woman,standing a head higher than her fiery little husband, but she moved with such quiet grace in herswaying hoops that the height attracted no attention to itself. Her neck, rising from the black taffetasheath of her basque, was creamy-skinned, rounded and slender, and it seemed always tiltedslightly backward by the weight of her luxuriant hair in its net at the back of her head. From herFrench mother, whose parents had fled Haiti in the Revolution of 1791, had come her slanting darkeyes, shadowed by inky lashes, and her black hair; and from her father, a soldier of Napoleon, she had her long straight nose and her square-cut jaw that was softened by the gentle curving of hercheeks. But only from life could Ellens face have acquired its look of pride that had nohaughtiness, its graciousness, its melancholy and its utter lack of humor.

She would have been a strikingly beautiful woman had there been any glow in her eyes, anyresponsive warmth in her smile or any spontaneity in her voice that fell with gentle melody on theears of her family and her servants. She spoke in the soft slurring voice of the coastal Georgian,liquid of vowels, kind to consonants and with the barest trace of French accent. It was a voicenever raised in command to a servant or reproof to a child but a voice that was obeyed instantly atTara, where her husbands blustering and roaring were quietly disregarded.

As far back as Scarlett could remember, her mother had always been the same, her voice softand sweet whether in praising or in reproving, her manner efficient and unruffled despite the dailyemergencies of Geralds turbulent household, her spirit always calm and her back unbowed, evenin the deaths of her three baby sons. Scarlett had never seen her mothers back touch the back ofany chair on which she sat. Nor had she ever seen her sit down without a bit of needlework in herhands, except at mealtime, while attending the sick or while working at the bookkeeping of theplantation. It was delicate embroidery if company were present, but at other times her hands wereoccupied with Geralds ruffled shirts, the girls dresses or garments for the slaves. Scarlett couldnot imagine her mothers hands without her gold thimble or her rustling figure unaccompanied bythe small negro girl whose sole function in life was to remove basting threads and carry therosewood sewing box from room to room, as Ellen moved about the house superintending thecooking, the cleaning and the wholesale clothes-making for the plantation.

She had never seen her mother stirred from her austere placidity, nor her personal appointmentsanything but perfect, no matter what the hour of day or night. When Ellen was dressing for a ballor for guests or even to go to Jonesboro for Court Day, it frequently required two hours, two maidsand Mammy to turn her out to her own satisfaction; but her swift toilets in times of emergencywere amazing.

Scarlett, whose room lay across the hall from her mothers, knew from babyhood the soft soundof scurrying bare black feet on the hardwood floor in the hours of dawn, the urgent tappings on hermothers door, and the muffled, frightened negro voices that whispered of sickness and birth anddeath in the long row of whitewashed cabins in the quarters. As a child, she often had crept to thedoor and, peeping through the tiniest crack, had seen Ellen emerge from the dark room, whereGeralds snores were rhythmic and untroubled, into the flickering light of an upheld candle, hermedicine case under her arm, her hair smoothed neatly place, and no button on her basqueunlooped.

It had always been so soothing to Scarlett to hear her mother whisper, firmly butcompassionately, as she tiptoed down the hall: Hush, not so loudly. You will wake Mr. OHara.

They are not sick enough to die.

Yes, it was good to creep back into bed and know that Ellen was abroad in the night andeverything was right.

In the mornings, after all-night sessions at births and deaths, when old Dr. Fontaine and youngDr. Fontaine were both out on calls and could not be found to help her, Ellen presided at the breakfast table as usual, her dark eyes circled with weariness but her voice and manner revealingnone of the strain. There was a steely quality under her stately gentleness that awed the wholehousehold, Gerald as well as the girls, though he would have died rather than admit it.

Sometimes when Scarlett tiptoed at night to kiss her tall mothers cheek, she looked up at themouth with its too short, too tender upper lip, a mouth too easily hurt by the world, and wonderedif it had ever curved in silly girlish giggling or whispered secrets through long nights to intimategirl friends. But no, that wasnt possible. Mother had always been just as she was, a pillar ofstrength, a fount of wisdom, the one person who knew the answers to everything.

But Scarlett wrong, for, years before, Ellen Robillard of Savannah had giggled as inexplicablyasany(was) fifteen-year-old in that charming coastal city and whispered the long nightsthrough with friends, exchanging confidences, telling all secrets but one. That was the year whenGerald OHara, twenty-eight years older than she, came into her lifethe year, too, when youthand her black-eyed cousin, Philippe Robillard, went out of it. For when Philippe, with his snappingeyes and his wild ways, left Savannah forever, he took with him the glow that was in Ellens heartand left for the bandy-legged little Irishman who married her only a gentle shell.

But that was enough for Gerald, overwhelmed at his unbelievable luck in actually marrying her.

And if anything was gone from her, he never missed it. Shrewd man that he was, he knew that itwas no less than a miracle that he, an Irishman with nothing of family and wealth to recommendhim, should win the daughter of one of the wealthiest and proudest families on the Coast. ForGerald was a self-made man.

Gerald had come to America from Ireland when he was twenty-one. He had come hastily, asmany a better and worse Irishman before and since, with the clothes he had on his back, twoshillings above his passage money and a price on his head that he felt was larger than his misdeedwarranted. There was no Orangeman this side of hell worth a hundred pounds to the Britishgovernment or to the devil himself; but if the government felt so strongly about the death of anEnglish absentee landlords rent agent, it was time for Gerald OHara to be leaving and leavingsuddenly. True, he had called the rent agent a bastard of an Orangeman, but that, according toGeralds way of looking at it, did not give the man any right to insult him by whistling the openingbars of The Boyne Water.

The Battle of the Boyne had been fought more than a hundred years before, but, to the OHarasand their neighbors, it might have been yesterday when their hopes and their dreams, as well astheir lands and wealth, went off in the same cloud of dust that enveloped a frightened and fleeingStuart prince, leaving William of Orange and his hated troops with their orange cockades to cutdown the Irish adherents of the Stuarts.

For this and other reasons, Geralds family was not inclined to view the fatal outcome of thisquarrel as anything very serious, except for the fact that it was charged with serious consequences.

For years, the OHaras had been in bad odor with the English constabulary on account of suspectedactivities against the government, and Gerald was not the first OHara to take his foot in his handand quit Ireland between dawn and morning. His two oldest brothers, James and Andrew, he hardlyremembered, save as close-lipped youths who came and went at odd hours of the night on mysterious errands or disappeared for weeks at a time, to their mothers gnawing anxiety. They hadcome to America years before, after the discovery of a small arsenal of rifles buried under theOHara pigsty. Now they were successful merchants in Savannah, though the dear God aloneknows where that may be, as their mother always interpolated when mentioning the two oldest ofher male brood, and it was to them that young Gerald was sent.

He left home with his mothers hasty kiss on his cheek and her fervent Catholic blessing in hisears, and his fathers parting admonition, Remember who ye are and dont be taking nothing offno man. His five tall brothers gave him good-by with admiring but slightly patronizing smiles, forGerald was the baby and the little one of a brawny family.

His five brothers and their father stood six feet and over and broad in proportion, but littleGerald, at twenty-one, knew that five feet four and a half inches was as much as the Lord in Hiswisdom was going to allow him. It was like Gerald that he never wasted regrets on his lack ofheight and never found it an obstacle to his acquisition of anything he wanted. Rather, it wasGeralds compact smallness that made him what he was, for he had learned early that little peoplemust be hardy to survive among large ones. And Gerald was hardy.

His tall brothers were a grim, quiet lot, in whom the family tradition of past glories, lost forever,rankled in unspoken hate and crackled out in bitter humor. Had Gerald been brawny, he wouldhave gone the way of the other OHaras and moved quietly and darkly among the rebels againstthe government But Gerald was loud-mouthed and bullheaded, as his mother fondly phrased it,hair trigger of temper, quick with his fists and possessed of a chip on his shoulder so large as to bealmost visible to the naked eye. He swaggered among the tall OHaras like a strutting bantam in abarnyard of giant Cochin roosters, and they loved him, baited him affectionately to hear him roarand hammered on him with their large fists no more than was necessary to keep a baby brother inhis proper place.

If the educational equipment which Gerald brought to America was scant, he did not even knowit. Nor would he have cared if he had been told. His mother had taught him to read and to write aclear hand. He was adept at ciphering. And there his book knowledge stopped. The only Latin heknew was the responses of the Mass and the only history the manifold wrongs of Ireland. He knewno poetry save that of Moore and no music except the songs of Ireland that had come downthrough the years. While he entertained the liveliest respect for those who had more book learningthan he, he never felt his own lack. And what need had he of these things in a new country wherethe most ignorant of bogtrotters had made great fortunes? in this country which asked only that aman be strong and unafraid of work?

Nor did James and Andrew, who took him into their store in Savannah, regret his lack ofeducation. His clear hand, his accurate figures and his shrewd ability in bargaining won theirrespect, where a knowledge of literature and a fine appreciation of music, had young Gerald possessedthem, would have moved them to snorts of contempt. America, in the early years of thecentury, had been kind to the Irish. James and Andrew, who had begun by hauling goods incovered wagons from Savannah to Georgias inland towns, had prospered into a store of their own,and Gerald prospered with them.

He liked the South, and he soon became, in his own opinion, a Southerner. There was much about the Southand Southernersthat he would never comprehend; but, with thewholeheartedness that was his nature, he adopted its ideas and customs, as he understood them, forhis ownpoker and horse racing, red-hot politics and the code duello, States Rights anddamnation to all Yankees, slavery and King Cotton, contempt for white trash and exaggeratedcourtesy to women. He even learned to chew tobacco. There was no need for him to acquire a goodhead for whisky, he had been born with one.

But Gerald remained Gerald. His habits of living and his ideas changed, but his manners hewould not change, even had he been able to change them. He admired the drawling elegance of thewealthy rice and cotton planters, who rode into Savannah from their moss-hung kingdoms,mounted on thoroughbred horses and followed by the carriages of their equally elegant ladies andthe wagons of their slaves. But Gerald could never attain elegance. Their lazy, blurred voices fellpleasantly on his ears, but his own brisk brogue clung to his tongue. He liked the casual grace withwhich they conducted affairs of importance, risking a fortune, a plantation or a slave on the turn ofa card and writing off their losses with careless good humor and no more ado than when theyscattered pennies to pickaninnies. But Gerald had known poverty, and he could never learn to losemoney with good humor or good grace. They were a pleasant race, these coastal Georgians, withtheir soft-voiced, quick rages and their charming inconsistencies, and Gerald liked them. But therewas a brisk and restless vitality about the young Irishman, fresh from a country where winds blewwet and chill, where misty swamps held no fevers, that set him apart from these indolent gentlefolkof semi-tropical weather and malarial marshes.

From them he learned what he found useful, and the rest he dismissed. He found poker the mostuseful of all Southern customs, poker and a steady head for whisky; and it was his natural aptitudefor cards and amber liquor that brought to Gerald two of his three most prized possessions, hisvalet and his plantation. The other was his wife, and he could only attribute her to the mysteriouskindness of God.

The, valet. Pork by name, shining black, dignified and trained in all the arts of sartorialelegance, was the result of an all-night poker game with a planter from St. Simons Island, whosecourage in a bluff equaled Geralds but whose head for New Orleans rum did not. Though Porksformer owner later offered to buy him back at twice his value, Gerald obstinately refused, for thepossession of his first slave, and that slave the best damn valet on the Coast, was the first stepupward toward his hearts desire, Gerald wanted to be a slave owner and a landed gentleman.

His mind was made up that he was not going to spend all of his days, like Tames and Andrew, inbargaining, or all his nights, by candlelight, over long columns of figures. He felt keenly, as hisbrothers did not, the social stigma attached to those in trade. Gerald wanted to be a planter. Withthe deep hunger of an Irishman who has been a tenant on the lands his people once had owned andhunted, he wanted to see his own acres stretching green before his eyes. With a ruthless singlenessof purpose, he desired his own house, his own plantation, his own horse, his own slaves. And herein this new country, safe from the twin perils of the land he had lefttaxation that ate up crops andbarns and the ever-present threat of sudden confiscationhe intended to have them. But havingthat ambition and bringing it to realization were two different matters, he discovered as time wentby. Coastal Georgia was too firmly held by an entrenched aristocracy for him ever to hope to winthe place he intended to have.

Then the hand of Fate and a hand of poker combined to give him the plantation which heafterwards called Tara, and at the same time moved him out of the Coast into the upland country ofnorth Georgia.

It was in a saloon in Savannah, on a hot night in spring, when the chance conversation of astranger sitting near by made Gerald prick up his ears. The stranger, a native of Savannah, had justreturned after twelve years in the inland country. He had been one of the winners in the land lotteryconducted by the State to divide up the vast area in middle Georgia, ceded by the Indians the yearbefore Gerald came to America. He had gone up there and established a plantation; but, now thehouse had burned down, he was tired of the accursed place and would be most happy to get it offhis hands.

Gerald, his mind never free of the thought of owning a plantation of his own, arranged anintroduction, and his interest grew as the stranger told how the northern section of the state wasfilling up with newcomers from the Carolinas and Virginia. Gerald had lived in Savannah longenough to acquire a viewpoint of the Coastthat all of the rest of the state was backwoods, withan Indian lurking in every thicket. In transacting business for OHara Brothers, he had visitedAugusta, a hundred miles up the Savannah River, and he had traveled inland far enough to visit theold towns westward from that city. He knew that section to be as well settled as the Coast, but fromthe strangers description, his plantation was more than two hundred and fifty miles inland fromSavannah to the north and west, and not many miles south of the Chattahoochee River. Geraldknew that northward beyond that stream the land was still held by the Cherokees, so it was withamazement that he heard the stranger jeer at suggestions of trouble with the Indians and narratehow thriving towns were growing up and plantations prospering in the new country.

An hour later when the conversation began to lag, Gerald, with a guile that belied the wideinnocence of his bright blue eyes, proposed a game. As the night wore on and the drinks wentround, there came a time when all the others in the game laid down their hands and Gerald and thestranger were battling alone. The stranger shoved in all his chips and followed with the deed to hisplantation. Gerald shoved in all his chips and laid on top of them his wallet. If the money itcontained happened to belong to the firm of OHara Brothers, Geralds conscience was notsufficiently troubled to confess it before Mass the following morning. He knew what he wanted,and when Gerald wanted something he gained it by taking the most direct route. Moreover, suchwas his faith in his destiny and four deuces that he never for a moment wondered just how themoney would be paid back should a higher hand be laid down across the table.

Its no bargain youre getting and I am glad not to have to pay more taxes on the place, sighedthe possessor of an ace full, as he called for pen and ink. The big house burned a year ago andthe fields are growing up in brush and seedling pine. But its yours.

Never mix cards and whisky unless you were weaned on Irish poteen, Gerald told Porkgravely the same evening, as Pork assisted him to bed. And the valet, who had begun to attempt abrogue out of admiration for his new master, made requisite answer in a combination of Geecheeand County Meath that would have puzzled anyone except those two alone.

The muddy Flint River, running silently between walls of pine and water oak covered withtangled vines, wrapped about Geralds new land like a curving arm and embraced it on two sides.

To Gerald, standing on the small knoll where the house had been, this tall barrier of green was asvisible and pleasing an evidence of ownership as though it were a fence that he himself had built tomark his own. He stood on the blackened foundation stones of the burned building, looked downthe long avenue of trees leading toward the road and swore lustily, with a joy too deep for thankfulprayer. These twin lines of somber trees were his, his the abandoned lawn, waist high in weeds underwhite-starred young magnolia trees. The uncultivated fields, studded with tiny pines andunderbrush, that stretched their rolling red-clay surface away into the distance on four sidesbelonged to Gerald OHarawere all his because he had an unbefuddled Irish head and thecourage to stake everything on a hand of cards.

Gerald closed his eyes and, in the stillness of the unworked acres, he felt that he had comehome. Here under his feet would rise a house of whitewashed brick. Across the road would be newrail fences, inclosing fat cattle and blooded horses, and the red earth that rolled down the hillside tothe rich river bottom land would gleam white as eiderdown in the suncotton; acres and acres ofcotton! The fortunes of the OHaras would rise again.

With his own small stake, what he could borrow from his unenthusiastic brothers and a neat sumfrom mortgaging the land, Gerald bought his first field hands and came to Tara to live in bachelorsolitude in the four-room overseers house, till such a time as the white walls of Tara should rise.

He cleared the fields and planted cotton and borrowed more money from James and Andrew tobuy more slaves. The OHaras were a clannish tribe, clinging to one another in prosperity as wellas in adversity, not for any overweening family affection but because they had learned throughgrim years that to survive a family must present an unbroken front to the world. They lent Geraldthe money and, in the years that followed, the money came back to them with interest. Graduallythe plantation widened out, as Gerald bought more acres lying near him, and in time the whitehouse became a reality instead of a dream.

It was built by slave labor, a clumsy sprawling building that crowned the rise of groundoverlooking the green incline of pasture land running down to the river; and it pleased Geraldgreatly, for, even when new, it wore a look of mellowed years. The old oaks, which had seenIndians pass under their limbs, hugged the house closely with their great trunks and towered theirbranches over the roof in dense shade. The lawn, reclaimed from weeds, grew thick with cloverand Bermuda grass, and Gerald saw to it that it was well kept. From the avenue of cedars to therow of white cabins in the slave quarters, there was an air of solidness, of stability and permanenceabout Tara, and whenever Gerald galloped around the bend in the road and saw his own roof risingthrough green branches, his heart swelled with pride as though each sight of it were the first sight.

He had done it all, little, hard-headed, blustering Gerald.

Gerald, was on excellent terms with all his neighbors in the County, except the MacIntoshswhose land adjoined his on the left and the Slatterys whose meager three acres stretched on hisright along the swamp bottoms between the river and John Wilkes plantation.

The MacIntoshs were Scotch-Irish and Orangemen and, had they possessed all the saintlyqualities of the Catholic calendar, this ancestry would have damned them forever in Geralds eyes.

True, they had lived in Georgia for seventy years and, before that, had spent a generation in theCarolinas; but the first of the family who set foot on American shores had come from Ulster, and that was enough for Gerald.

They a close-mouthed and stiff-necked family, who kept strictly to themselves andintermarriedw(were) ith their Carolina relatives, and Gerald was not alone in disliking them, for theCounty people were neighborly and sociable and none too tolerant of anyone lacking in those samequalities. Rumors of Abolitionist sympathies did not enhance the popularity of the Macintoshes.

Old Angus had never manumitted a single slave and had committed the unpardonable social breachof selling some of his negroes to passing slave traders en route to the cane fields of Louisiana, butthe rumors persisted.

Hes an Abolitionist, no doubt, observed Gerald to John Wilkes. But, in an Orangeman, whena principle comes up against Scotch tightness, the principle fares ill.

The Slatterys were another affair. Being poor white, they were not even accorded the grudgingrespect that Angus Macintoshs dour independence wrung from neighboring families. Old Slattery,who clung persistently to his few acres, in spite of repeated offers from Gerald and John Wilkes,shiftless and whining. His wife snarly-haired woman, sickly and washed-out of appe(was) arance,themotherofabroodofsulle(was) n(a) and rabbity-looking childrena brood which wasincreased regularly every year. Tom Slattery owned no slaves, and he and his two oldest boysspasmodically worked their few acres of cotton, while the wife and younger children tended whatwas supposed to be a vegetable garden. But, somehow, the cotton always failed, and the garden,due to Mrs. Slatterys constant childbearing, seldom furnished enough to feed her flock.

The sight of Tom Slattery dawdling on his neighbors porches, begging cotton seed for plantingor a side of bacon to tide him over, was a familiar one. Slattery hated his neighbors with whatlittle energy he possessed, sensing their contempt beneath their courtesy, and especially did he haterich folks uppity niggers. The house negroes of the County considered themselves superior towhite trash, and their unconcealed scorn stung him, while their more secure position in life stirredhis envy. By contrast with his own miserable existence, they were well-fed, well-clothed andlooked after in sickness and old age. They were proud of the good names of their owners and, forthe most part, proud to belong to people who were quality, while he was despised by all.

Tom Slattery could have sold his farm for three times its value to any of the planters in theCounty. They would have considered it money well spent to rid the community of an eyesore, buthe was well satisfied to remain and to subsist miserably on the proceeds of a bale of cotton a yearand the charity of his neighbors.

With all the rest of the County, Gerald was on terms of amity and some intimacy. The Wilkeses,the Calverts, the Tarletons, the Fontaines, all smiled when the small figure on the big white horsegalloped up their driveways, smiled and signaled for tall glasses in which a pony of Bourbon hadbeen poured over a teaspoon of sugar and a sprig of crushed mint. Gerald was likable, and theneighbors learned in time what the children, negroes and dogs discovered at first sight, that a kindheart, a ready and sympathetic ear and an open pocketbook lurked just behind his. bawling voiceand his truculent manner.

His arrival was always amid a bedlam of hounds barking and small black children shouting asthey raced to meet him, quarreling for the privilege of holding his horse and squirming andgrinning under his good-natured insults. The white children clamored to sit on his knee and be trotted, while he denounced to their elders the infamy of Yankee politicians; the daughters of hisfriends took him into their confidence about their love affairs, and the youths of the neighborhood,fearful of confessing debts of honor upon the carpets of their fathers, found him a friend in need.

So, youve been owning this for a month, you young rascal! he would shout And, in Godsname, why havent you been asking me for the money before this?

His rough manner of speech was too well known to give offense, and it only made the youngmen grin sheepishly and reply: Well, sir, I hated to trouble you, and my father

Your fathers a good man, and no denying it, but strict, and so take this and lets be hearing nomore of it

The planters ladies were the last to capitulate. But, when Mrs. Wilkes, a great lady and with arare gift for silence, as Gerald characterized her, told her husband one evening, after Geraldshorse had pounded down the driveway. He has a rough tongue, but he is a gentleman, Gerald haddefinitely arrived.

He did not know that he had taken nearly ten years to arrive, for it never occurred to him that hisneighbors had eyed him askance at first. In his own mind, there had never been any doubt that hebelonged, from the moment he first set foot on Tara.

When Gerald was forty-three, so thickset of body and florid of face that he looked like a huntingsquire out of a sporting print, it came to him that Tara, dear though it was, and the County folk,with their open hearts and open houses, were not enough. He wanted a wife.

Tara cried out for a mistress. The fat cook, a yard negro elevated by necessity to the kitchen,never had the meals on time, and the chambermaid, formerly a field hand, let dust accumulate onthe furniture and never seemed to have clean linen on hand, so that the arrival of guests was alwaysthe occasion of much stirring and to-do. Pork, the only trained house negro on the place, had generalsupervision over the other servants, but even he had grown slack and careless after severalyears of exposure to Geralds happy-go-lucky mode of living. As valet, he kept Geralds bedroomin order, and, as butler, he served the meals with dignity and style, but otherwise he pretty well letmatters follow their own course.

With unerring African instinct, the negroes had all discovered that Gerald had a loud bark andno bite at all, and they took shameless advantage of him. The air was always thick with threats ofselling slaves south and of direful whippings, but there never had been a slave sold from Tara andonly one whipping, and that administered for not grooming down Geralds pet horse after, a longdays hunting.

Geralds sharp blue eyes noticed how efficiently his neighbors houses were run and with whatease the smooth-haired wives in rustling skirts managed their servants. He had no knowledge ofthe dawn-till-midnight activities of these women, chained to supervision of cooking, nursing,sewing and laundering. He only saw the outward results, and those results impressed him.

The urgent need of a wife became clear to him one morning when he was dressing to ride totown for Court Day. Pork brought forth his favorite ruffled shirt, so inexpertly mended by thechambermaid as to be unwearable by anyone except his valet Mist Gerald, said Pork, gratefully rolling up the shirt as Gerald fumed, whut you needs is awife, and a wife whut has got pleny of house niggers.

Gerald upbraided Pork for his impertinence, hut he knew that he was right He wanted a wife andhe wanted children and, if he did not acquire them soon, it would be too late. But he was not goingto marry just anyone, as Mr. Calvert had done, taking to wife the Yankee governess of hismotherless children. His wife must be a lady and a lady of blood, with as many airs and graces asMrs. Wilkes and the ability to manage Tara as well as Mrs. Wilkes ordered her own domain.

But there were two difficulties in the way of marriage into the County families. The first was thescarcity of girls of marriageable age. The second, and more serious one, was that Gerald was anew man, despite his nearly ten years residence, and a foreigner. No one knew anything abouthis family. While the society of up-country Georgia was not so impregnable as that of the Coastaristocrats, no family wanted a daughter to wed a man about whose grandfather nothing wasknown.

Gerald knew that despite the genuine liking of the County men with whom he hunted, drank andtalked politics there was hardly one whose daughter he could marry. And he did not intend to haveit gossiped about over supper tables that this, that or the other father had regretfully refused to letGerald OHara pay court to his daughter. This knowledge did not make Gerald feel inferior to hisneighbors: Nothing could ever make Gerald feel that he was inferior in any way to anyone. It wasmerely a quaint custom of the County that daughters only married into families who had lived inthe South much longer than twenty-two years, had owned land and slaves and been addicted onlyto the fashionable vices during that time.

Pack up. Were going to Savannah, he told Pork. And if I hear you say Whist! or Faith!

but once, its selling you Ill be doing, for they are words I seldom say meself.

James and Andrew might have some advice to offer on this subject of marriage, and there mightbe daughters among their old friends who would both meet his requirements and find himacceptable as a husband. James and Andrew listened to his story patiently but they gave him littleencouragement. They had no Savannah relatives to whom they might look for assistance, for theyhad been married when they came to America. And the daughters of their old friends had longsince married and were raising small children of their own.

Youre not a rich man and you havent a great family, said James.

Ive made me money and I can make a great family. And I wont be marrying just anyone.

You fly high, observed Andrew, dryly.

But they did their best for Gerald. James and Andrew were old men and they stood well inSavannah. They had many friends, and for a month they carried Gerald from home to home, tosuppers, dances and picnics.

Theres only one who takes me eye, Gerald said finally. And she not even born when Ilanded here.

And who is it takes your eye?

Miss Ellen Robillard, said Gerald, trying to speak casually, for the slightly tilting dark eyes of Ellen Robillard had taken more than his eye. Despite a mystifying listlessness of manner, sostrange in a girl of fifteen, she charmed him. Moreover, there was a haunting look of despair abouther that went to his heart and made him more gentle with her than he had ever been with any personin all the world.

And you old enough to be her father!

And me in me prime! cried Gerald stung.

James spoke gently.

Jerry, theres no girl in Savannah youd have less chance of marrying. Her father is a Robillard,and those French are proud as Lucifer. And her motherGod rest her soulwas a very greatlady.

I care not, said Gerald heatedly. Besides, her mother is dead, and old man Robillard likesme.

As a man, yes, but as a son-in-law, no.

The girl wouldnt have you anyway, interposed Andrew. Shes been in love with that wildbuck of a cousin of hers, Philippe Robillard, for a year now, despite her family being at hermorning and night to give him up.

Hes been gone to Louisiana this month now, said Gerald.

And how do you know?

I know, answered Gerald, who did not care to disclose that Pork had supplied this valuable bitof information, or that Philippe had departed for the West at the express desire of his family. AndI do not think shes been so much in love with him that she wont forget him. Fifteen is too youngto know much about love.

Theyd rather have that breakneck cousin for her than you.

So, James and Andrew were as startled as anyone when the news came out that the daughter ofPierre Robillard was to marry the little Irishman from up the country. Savannah buzzed behind itsdoors and speculated about Philippe Robillard, who had gone West, but the gossiping brought noanswer. Why the loveliest of the Robillard daughters should marry a loud-voiced, red-faced littleman who came hardly up to her ears remained a mystery to all.

Gerald himself never quite knew how it all came about. He only knew that a miracle hadhappened. And, for once in his life, he was utterly humble when Ellen, very white but very calm,put a light hand on his arm and said: I will marry you, Mr. OHara.

The thunderstruck Robillards knew the answer in part, but only Ellen and her mammy everknew the whole story of the night when the girl sobbed till the dawn like a broken-hearted childand rose up in the morning a woman with her mind made up.

With foreboding, Mammy had brought her young mistress a small package, addressed in astrange hand from New Orleans, a package containing a miniature of Ellen, which she flung to thefloor with a cry, four letters in her own handwriting to Philippe Robillard, and a brief letter from aNew Orleans priest, announcing the death of her cousin in a barroom brawl.

They drove him away. Father and Pauline and Eulalie. They drove him away. I hate them. Ihate them all. I never want to see them again. I want to get away. I will go away where Ill neversee them again, or this town, or anyone who reminds me ofofhim.

And when the night was nearly spent, Mammy, who had cried herself out over her mistress darkhead, protested, But, honey, you kain do dat!

I will do it. He is a kind man. I will do it or go into the convent at Charleston.

It was the threat of the convent that finally won the assent of bewildered and heart-strickenPierre Robillard. He was staunchly Presbyterian, even though his family were Catholic, and thethought of his daughter becoming a nun was even worse than that of her marrying Gerald OHara.

After all, the man had nothing against him but a lack of family.

So, Ellen, no longer Robillard, turned her back on Savannah, never to see it again, and with amiddle-aged husband, Mammy, and twenty house niggers journeyed toward Tara.

The next year, their first child was born and they named her Katie Scarlett, after Geraldsmother. Gerald was disappointed, for he had wanted a son, but he nevertheless was pleased enoughover his small black-haired daughter to serve rum to every slave at Tara and to get roaringly,happily drunk himself.

If Ellen had ever regretted her sudden decision to marry him, no one ever knew it, certainly notGerald, who almost burst with pride whenever he looked at her. She had put Savannah and itsmemories behind her when she left that gently mannered city by the sea, and, from the moment ofher arrival in the County, north Georgia was her home.

When she departed from her fathers house forever, she had left a home whose lines were asbeautiful and flowing as a womans body, as a ship in full sail; a pale pink stucco house built in theFrench colonial style, set high from the ground in a dainty manner, approached by swirling stairs,banistered with wrought iron as delicate as lace; a dim, rich house, gracious but aloof.

She had left not only that graceful dwelling but also the entire civilization that was behind thebuilding of it, and she found herself in a world that was as strange and different as if she hadcrossed a continent.

Here in north Georgia was a rugged section held by a hardy people. High up on the plateau atthe foot of the Blue Ridge Mountains, she saw rolling red hills wherever she looked, with hugeoutcroppings of the underlying granite and gaunt pines towering somberly everywhere. It allseemed wild and untamed to her coast-bred eyes accustomed to the quiet jungle beauty of the seaislands draped in their gray moss and tangled green, the white stretches of beach hot beneath asemitropic sun, the long flat vistas of sandy land studded with palmetto and palm.

This was a section that knew the chill of winter, as well as the heat of summer, and there was avigor and energy in the people that was strange to her. They were a kindly people, courteous,generous, filled with abounding good nature, but sturdy, virile, easy to anger. The people of theCoast which she had left might pride themselves on taking all their affairs, even their duels andtheir feuds, with a careless air but these north Georgia people had a streak of violence in them. Onthe coast, life had mellowedhere it was young and lusty and new.

All the people Ellen had known in Savannah might have been cast from the same mold, sosimilar were their view points and traditions, but here was a variety of people. North Georgiassettlers were coming in from many different places, from other parts of Georgia, from theCarolinas and Virginia, from Europe and the North. Some of them, like Gerald, were new peopleseeking their fortunes. Some, like Ellen, were members of old families who had found lifeintolerable in their former homes and sought haven in a distant land. Many had moved for noreason at all, except that the restless blood of pioneering fathers still quickened in their veins.

These people, drawn from many different places and with many different backgrounds, gave thewhole life of the County an informality that was new to Ellen, an informality to which she neverquite accustomed herself. She instinctively knew how Coast people would act in any circumstance.

There was never any telling what north Georgians would do.

And, quickening all of the affairs of the section, was the high tide of prosperity then rolling overthe South. All of the world was crying out for cotton, and the new land of the County, unworn andfertile, produced it abundantly. Cotton was the heartbeat of the section, the planting and thepicking were the diastole and systole of the red earth. Wealth came out of the curving furrows, andarrogance came tooarrogance built on green bushes and the acres of fleecy white. If cotton couldmake them rich in one generation, how much richer they would be in the next!

This certainty of the morrow gave zest and enthusiasm to life, and the County people enjoyedlife with a heartiness that Ellen could never understand. They had money enough and slavesenough to give them time to play, and they liked to play. They seemed never too busy to drop workfor a fish fry, a hunt or a horse race, and scarcely a week went by without its barbecue or ball.

Ellen never would, or could, quite become one of themshe had left too much of herself inSavannahbut she respected them and, in time, learned to admire the frankness and forthrightnessof these people, who had few reticences and who valued a man for what he was.

She became the best-loved neighbor in the County. She was a thrifty and kind mistress, a goodmother and a devoted wife. The heartbreak and selflessness that she would have dedicated to theChurch were devoted instead to the service of her child, her household and the man who had takenher out of Savannah and its memories and had never asked any questions.

When Scarlett was a year old, and more healthy and vigorous than a girl baby had any right tobe, in Mammys opinion, Ellens second child, named Susan Elinor, but always called Suellen, wasborn, and in due time came Carreen, listed in the family Bible as Caroline Irene. Then followedthree little boys, each of whom died before he had learned to walkthree little boys who now layunder the twisted cedars in the burying ground a hundred yards from the house, beneath threestones, each bearing the name of Gerald OHara, Jr.

From the day when Ellen first came to Tara, the place had been transformed. If she was onlyfifteen years old, she was nevertheless ready for the responsibilities of the mistress of a plantation.

Before marriage, young girls must be, above all other things, sweet, gentle, beautiful and ornamental,but, after marriage, they were expected to manage households that numbered a hundredpeople or more, white and black, and they were trained with that in view.

Ellen had been given this preparation for marriage which any well-brought-up young lady received, and she also had Mammy, who could galvanize the most shiftless negro into energy. Shequickly brought order, dignity and grace into Geralds household, and she gave Tara a beauty it hadnever had before.

The house had been built according to no architectural plan whatever, with extra rooms addedwhere and when it seemed convenient, but, with Ellens care and attention, it gained a charm thatmade up for its lack of design. The avenue of cedars leading from the main road to the housethatavenue of cedars without which no Georgia planters home could be completehad a cool darkshadiness that gave a brighter tinge, by contrast, to the green of the other trees. The wistariatumbling over the verandas showed bright against the whitewashed brick, and it joined with thepink crpe myrtle bushes by the door and the white-blossomed magnolias in the yard to disguisesome of the awkward lines of the house.

In spring time and summer, the Bermuda grass and clover on the lawn became emerald, soenticing an emerald that it presented an irresistible temptation to the flocks of turkeys and whitegeese that were supposed to roam only the regions in the rear of the house. The elders of the flockscontinually led stealthy advances into the front yard, lured on by the green of the grass and theluscious promise of the cape jessamine buds and the zinnia beds. Against their depredations, asmall black sentinel was stationed on the front porch. Armed with a ragged towel, the little negroboy sitting on the steps was part of the picture of Taraand an unhappy one, for he was forbiddento chunk the fowls and could only flap the towel at them and shoo them.

Ellen set dozens of little black boys to this task, the first position of responsibility a male slavehad at Tara. After they had passed their tenth year, they were sent to old Daddy the plantationcobbler to learn his trade, or to Amos the wheelwright and carpenter, or Phillip the cow man, orCuffee the mule boy. If they showed no aptitude for any of these trades, they became field handsand, in the opinion of the negroes, they had lost their claim to any social standing at all.

Ellens life was not easy, nor was it happy, but she did not expect life to be easy, and, if it wasnot happy, that was womans lot. It was a mans world, and she accepted it as such. The manowned the property, and the woman managed it. The man took the credit for the management, andthe woman praised his cleverness. The man roared like a bull when a splinter was in his finger, andthe woman muffled the moans of childbirth, lest she disturb him. Men were rough of speech andoften drunk. Women ignored the lapses of speech and put the drunkards to bed without bitterwords. Men were rude and outspoken, women were always kind, gracious and forgiving.

She had been reared in the tradition of great ladies, which had taught her how to carry herburden and still retain her charm, and she intended that her three daughters should be great ladiesalso. With her younger daughters, she had success, for Suellen was so anxious to be attractive shelent an attentive and obedient ear to her mothers teachings, and Carreen was shy and easily led.

But Scarlett, child of Gerald, found the road to ladyhood hard.

To Mammys indignation, her preferred playmates were not her demure sisters or the wellbrought-up Wilkes girls but the negro children on the plantation and the boys of the neighborhood,and she could climb a tree or throw a rock as well as any of them. Mammy was greatly perturbedthat Ellens daughter should display such traits and frequently adjured her to ack lak a lil lady.

But Ellen took a more tolerant and long-sighted view of the matter. She knew that from childhood playmates grew beaux in later years, and the first duty of a girl was to get married. She told herselfthat the child was merely full of life and there was still time in which to teach her the arts andgraces of being attractive to men.

To this end, Ellen and Mammy bent their efforts, and as Scarlett grew older she became an aptpupil in this subject, even though she learned little else. Despite a succession of governesses andtwo years at the near-by Fayetteville Female Academy, her education was sketchy, but no girl inthe County danced more gracefully than she. She knew how to smile so that her dimples leaped,how to walk pigeon-toed so that her wide hoop skirts swayed entrancingly, how to look up into amans face and then drop her eyes and bat the lids rapidly so that she seemed a-tremble with gentleemotion. Most of all she learned how to conceal from men a sharp intelligence beneath a face assweet and bland as a babys.

Ellen, by soft-voiced admonition, and Mammy, by constant carping, labored to inculcate in herthe qualities that would make her truly desirable as a wife.

You must be more gentle, dear, more sedate, Ellen told her daughter. You must not interruptgentlemen when they are speaking, even if you do think you know more about matters than theydo. Gentlemen do not like forward girls.

Young misses whut frowns an pushes out dey chins an says Ah will and Ah woan mos

generly doan ketch husbands, prophesied Mammy gloomily. Young misses should cas downdey eyes an say, Well, suh, Ah mout an Jes as you say, suh.

Between them, they taught her all that a gentlewoman should know, but she learned only theoutward signs of gentility. The inner grace from which these signs should spring, she never learnednor did she see any reason for learning it. Appearances were enough, for the appearances ofladyhood won her popularity and that was all she wanted. Gerald bragged that she was the belle offive counties, and with some truth, for she had received proposals from nearly all the young men inthe neighborhood and many from places as far away as Atlanta and Savannah.

At sixteen, thanks to Mammy and Ellen, she looked sweet, charming and giddy, but she was, inreality, self-willed, vain and obstinate. She had the easily stirred passions of her Irish father andnothing except the thinnest veneer of her mothers unselfish and forbearing nature. Ellen neverfully realized that it was only a veneer, for Scarlett always showed her best face to her mother,concealing her escapades, curbing her temper and appearing as sweet-natured as she could inEllens presence, for her mother could shame her to tears with a reproachful glance.

But Mammy was under no illusions about her and was constantly alert for breaks in the veneer.

Mammys eyes were sharper than Ellens, and Scarlett could never recall in all her life havingfooled Mammy for long.

It was not that these two loving mentors deplored Scarletts high spirits, vivacity and charm.

These were traits of which Southern women were proud. It was Geralds headstrong and impetuousnature in her that gave them concern, and they sometimes feared they would not be able to concealher damaging qualities until she had made a good match. But Scarlett intended to marryandmarry Ashleyand she was willing to appear demure, pliable and scatterbrained, if those were thequalities that attracted men. Just why men should be this way, she did not know. She only knew that such methods worked. It never interested her enough to try to think out the reason for it, forshe knew nothing of the inner workings of any human beings mind, not even her own. She knewonly that if she did or said thus-and-so, men would unerringly respond with the complementarythus-and-so. It was like a mathematical formula and no more difficult, for mathematics was the onesubject that had come easy to Scarlett in her schooldays.

If she knew little about mens minds, she knew even less about the minds of women, for theyinterested her less. She had never had a girl friend, and she never felt any lack on that account. Toher, all women, including her two sisters, were natural enemies in pursuit of the same preyman.

All women with the one exception of her mother.

Ellen OHara was different, and Scarlett regarded her as something holy and apart from all therest of humankind. When Scarlett was a child, she had confused her mother with the Virgin Mary,and now that she was older she saw no reason for changing her opinion. To her, Ellen representedthe utter security that only Heaven or a mother can give. She knew that her mother was theembodiment of justice, truth, loving tenderness and profound wisdoma great lady.

Scarlett wanted very much to be like her mother. The only difficulty was that by being just andtruthful and tender and unselfish, one missed most of the joys of life, and certainly many beaux.

And life was too short to miss such pleasant things. Some day when she was married to Ashley andold, some day when she had time for it, she intended to be like Ellen. But, until then

Chapter 4

THAT NIGHT AT SUPPER, Scarlett went through the motions of presiding over the table in hermothers absence, but her mind was in a ferment over the dreadful news she had heard aboutAshley and Melanie. Desperately she longed for her mothers return from the Slatterys, for,without her, she felt lost and alone. What right had the Slatterys and their everlasting sickness totake Ellen away from home just at this time when she, Scarlett, needed her so much?

Throughout the dismal meal, Geralds booming voice battered against her ears until she thoughtshe could endure it no longer. He had forgotten completely about his conversation with her thatafternoon and was carrying on a monologue about the latest news from Fort Sumter, which hepunctuated by hammering his fist on the table and waving his arms in the air. Gerald made a habitof dominating the conversation at mealtimes, and usually Scarlett, occupied with her ownthoughts, scarcely heard him; but tonight she could not shut out his voice, no matter how much shestrained to listen for the sound of carriage wheels that would herald Ellens return.

Of course, she did not intend to tell her mother what was so heavy on her heart, for Ellen wouldbe shocked and grieved to know that a daughter of hers wanted a man who was engaged to anothergirl. But, in the depths of the first tragedy she had ever known, she wanted the very comfort of hermothers presence. She always felt secure when Ellen was by her, for there was nothing so bad thatEllen could not better it, simply by being there.

She rose suddenly from her chair at the sound of creaking wheels in the driveway and then sankdown again as they went on around the house to the back yard. It could not be Ellen, for she would alight at the front steps. Then there was an excited babble of negro voices in the darkness of theyard and high-pitched negro laughter. Looking out the window, Scarlett saw Pork, who had left theroom a moment before, holding high a flaring pine knot, while indistinguishable figures descendedfrom a wagon. The laughter and talking rose and fell in the dark night air, pleasant, homely,carefree sounds, gutturally soft, musically shrill. Then feet shuffled up the back-porch stairs andinto the passageway leading to the main house, stopping in the hall just outside the dining room.

There was a brief interval of whispering, and Pork entered, his usual dignity gone, his eyes rollingand his teeth a-gleam.

Mist Gerald, he announced, breathing hard, the pride of a bridegroom all over his shiningface, you new oman done come.

New woman? I didnt buy any new woman, declared Gerald, pretending to glare.

Yassah, you did, Mist Gerald! Yassah! An she out hyah now wanting ter speak wid you,

answered Pork, giggling and twisting his hands in excitement.

Well, bring in the bride, said Gerald, and Pork, turning, beckoned into the hall to his wife,newly arrived from the Wilkes plantation to become part of the household of Tara. She entered,and behind her, almost hidden by her voluminous calico skirts, came her twelve-year-old daughter,squirming against her mothers legs.

Dilcey was tall and bore herself erectly. She might have been any age from thirty to sixty, sounlined was her immobile bronze face. Indian blood was plain in her features, overbalancing thenegroid characteristics. The red color of her skin, narrow high forehead, prominent cheek bones,and the hawk-bridged nose which flattened at the end above thick negro lips, all showed themixture of two races. She was self-possessed and walked with a dignity that surpassed evenMammys, for Mammy had acquired her dignity and Dilceys was in her blood.

When she spoke, her voice was not so slurred as most negroes and she chose her words morecarefully.

Good evenin, young Misses. Mist Gerald, I is sorry to sturb you, but I wanted to come hereand thank you agin fo buyin me and my chile. Lots of gentlemens might a bought me but theywouldnt a bought my Prissy, too, jes to keep me frum grievin and I thanks you. Im gwine domy bes fo you and show you I aint forgettin.

Humhurrump, said Gerald, clearing his throat in embarrassment at being caught openly inan act of kindness.

Dilcey turned to Scarlett and something like a smile wrinkled the corners of her eyes. MissScarlett, Poke done tole me how you ast Mist Gerald to buy me. And so Im gwine give you myPrissy fo yo own maid.

She reached behind her and jerked the little girl forward. She was a brown little creature, withskinny legs like a bird and a myriad of pigtails carefully wrapped with twine sticking stiffly outfrom her head. She had sharp, knowing eyes that missed nothing and a studiedly stupid look on herface.

Thank you, Dilcey, Scarlett replied, but Im afraid Mammy will have something to say about that. Shes been my maid ever since I was born.

Mammy getting ole, said Dilcey, with a calmness that would have enraged Mammy. She agood mammy, but you a young lady now and needs a good maid, and my Prissy been maidin fo

Miss India fo a year now. She kin sew and fix hair good as a grown pusson.

Prodded by her mother, Prissy bobbed a sudden curtsy and grinned at Scarlett, who could nothelp grinning back.

A sharp little wench, she thought, and said aloud: Thank you, Dilcey, well see about it whenMother comes home.

Thankee, Mam. I gives you a good night, said Dilcey and, turning, left the room with herchild, Pork dancing attendance. The supper things cleared away, Gerald resumed his oration, butwith little satisfaction to himself and none at all to his audience. His thunderous predictions ofimmediate war and his rhetorical questions as to whether the South would stand for further insultsfrom the Yankees only produced faintly bored, Yes, Papas and No, Pas. Carreen, sitting on ahassock under the big lamp, was deep in the romance of a girl who had taken the veil after herlovers death and, with silent tears of enjoyment oozing from her eyes, was pleasurably picturingherself in a white coif. Suellen, embroidering on what she gigglingly called her hope chest, waswondering if she could possibly detach Stuart Tarleton from her sisters side at the barbecuetomorrow and fascinate him with the sweet womanly qualities which she possessed and Scarlettdid not. And Scarlett was in a tumult about Ashley.

How could Pa talk on and on about Fort Sumter and the Yankees when he knew her heart wasbreaking? As usual in the very young, she marveled that people could be so selfishly oblivious toher pain and the world rock along just the same, in spite of her heartbreak.

Her mind was as if a cyclone had gone through it, and it seemed strange that the dining roomwhere they sat should be so placid, so unchanged from what it had always been. The heavymahogany table and sideboards, the massive silver, the bright rag rugs on the shining floor were allin their accustomed places, just as if nothing had happened. It was a friendly and comfortable roomand, ordinarily, Scarlett loved the quiet hours which the family spent there after supper; but tonightshe hated the sight of it and, if she had not feared her fathers loudly bawled questions, she wouldhave slipped away, down the dark hall to Ellens little office and cried out her sorrow on the oldsofa.

That was the room that Scarlett liked the best in all the house. There, Ellen sat before her tallsecretary each morning, keeping the accounts of the plantation and listening to the reports of JonasWilkerson, the overseer. There also the family idled while Ellens quill scratched across herledgers, Gerald in the old rocker, the girls on the sagging cushions of the sofa that was too batteredand worn for the front of the house. Scarlett longed to be there now, alone with Ellen, so she couldput her head in her mothers lap and cry in peace. Wouldnt Mother ever come home?

Then, wheels ground sharply on the graveled driveway, and the soft murmur of Ellens voicedismissing the coachman floated into the room. The whole group looked up eagerly as she enteredrapidly, her hoops swaying, her face tired and sad. There entered with her the faint fragrance oflemon verbena sachet, which seemed always to creep from the folds of her dresses, a fragrance that was always linked in Scarletts mind with her mother. Mammy followed at a few paces, the leatherbag in her hand, her underlip pushed out and her brow lowering. Mammy muttered darkly toherself as she waddled, taking care that her remarks were pitched too low to be understood butloud enough to register her unqualified disapproval.

I am sorry I am so late, said Ellen, slipping her plaid shawl from drooping shoulders andhanding it to Scarlett, whose cheek she patted in passing.

Geralds face had brightened as if by magic at her entrance.

Is the brat baptized? he questioned.

Yes, and dead, poor thing, said Ellen. I feared Emmie would die too, but I think she willlive.

The girls faces turned to her, startled and questioning, and Gerald wagged his headphilosophically.

Well, tis better so that the brat is dead, no doubt, poor fatherle

It is late. We had better have prayers now, interrupted Ellen so smoothly that, if Scarlett hadnot known her mother well, the interruption would have passed unnoticed.

It would be interesting to know who was the father of Emmie Slatterys baby, but Scarlett knewshe would never learn the truth of the matter if she waited to hear it from her mother. Scarlettsuspected Jonas Wilkerson, for she had frequently seen him walking down the road with Emmie atnightfall. Jonas was a Yankee and a bachelor, and the fact that he was an overseer forever barredhim from any contact with the County social life. There was no family of any standing into whichhe could marry, no people with whom he could associate except the Slatterys and riffraff like them.

As he was several cuts above the Slatterys in education, it was only natural that he should not wantto marry Emmie, no matter how often he might walk with her in the twilight.

Scarlett sighed, for her curiosity was sharp. Things were always happening under her motherseyes which she noticed no more than if they had not happened at all. Ellen ignored all thingscontrary to her ideas of propriety and tried to teach Scarlett to do the same, but with poor success.

Ellen had stepped to the mantel to take her rosary beads from the small inlaid casket in whichthey always reposed when Mammy spoke up with firmness.

Miss Ellen, you gwine eat some supper befo you does any prayin.

Thank you. Mammy, but I am not hungry.

Ah gwine fix yo supper mahseff an you eats it, said Mammy, her brow furrowed withindignation as she started down the hall for the kitchen. Poke! she called, tell Cookie stir up defiah. Miss Ellen home.

As the boards shuddered under her weight, the soliloquy she had been muttering in the front hallgrew louder and louder, coming clearly to the ears of the family in the dining room.

Ah has said time an again, it doan do no good doin nuthin fer wite trash. Dey is deshiflesses, mos ungrateful passel of no-counts livin. An Miss Ellen got no bizness weahin

herseff out waitin on folks dat did dey be wuth shootin deyd have niggers ter wait on dem. An Ah has said

Her voice trailed off as she went down the long open passageway, covered only by a roof, thatled into the kitchen. Mammy had her own method of letting her owners know exactly where shestood on all matters. She knew it was beneath the dignity of quality white folks to pay the slightestattention to what a darky said when she was just grumbling to herself. She knew that to uphold thisdignity, they must ignore what she said, even if she stood in the next room and almost shouted. Itprotected her from reproof, and it left no doubt in anyones mind as to her exact views on anysubject.

Pork entered the room, bearing a plate, silver and a napkin. He was followed closely by Jack, ablack little boy of ten, hastily buttoning a white linen jacket with one hand and bearing in the othera fly-swisher, made of thin strips of newspaper tied to a reed longer than he was. Ellen had abeautiful peacock-feather fly-brusher, but it was used only on very special occasions and then onlyafter domestic struggle, due to the obstinate conviction of Pork, Cookie and Mammy that peacockfeathers were bad luck.

Ellen sat down in the chair which Gerald pulled out for her and four voices attacked her.

Mother, the lace is loose on my new ball dress and I want to wear it tomorrow night at TwelveOaks. Wont you please fix it?

Mother, Scarletts new dress is prettier than mine and I look like a fright in pink. Why cant shewear my pink and let me wear her green? She looks all right in pink.

Mother, can I stay up for the ball tomorrow night? Im thirteen now

Mrs. OHara, would you believe it Hush, you girls, before I take me crop to you! CadeCalvert was in Atlanta this morning and he sayswill you be quiet and let me be hearing me ownvoice?and he says its all upset they are there and talking nothing but war, militia drilling, troopsforming. And he says the news from Charleston is that they will be putting up with no moreYankee insults.

Ellens tired mouth smiled into the tumult as she addressed herself first to her husband, as a wifeshould.

If the nice people of Charleston feel that way, Im sure we will all feel the same way soon, shesaid, for she had a deeply rooted belief that, excepting only Savannah, most of the gentle blood ofthe whole continent could be found in that small seaport city, a belief shared largely byCharlestonians.

No, Carreen, next year, dear. Then you can stay up for balls and wear grown-up dresses, andwhat a good time my little pink cheeks will have! Dont pout, dear. You can go to the barbecue,remember that, and stay up through supper, but no balls until you are fourteen.

Give me your gown, Scarlett, I will whip the lace for you after prayers.

Suellen, I do not like your tone, dear. Your pink gown is lovely and suitable to yourcomplexion, Scarletts is to hers. But you may wear my garnet necklace tomorrow night.

Suellen, behind her mothers back, wrinkled her nose triumphantly at Scarlett who had beenplanning to beg the necklace for herself. Scarlett put out her tongue at her. Suellen was an annoying sister with her whining and selfishness, and had it not been for Ellens restraining hand,Scarlett would frequently have boxed her ears.

Now, Mr. OHara, tell me more about what Mr. Calvert said about Charleston, said Ellen.

Scarlett knew her mother cared nothing at all about war and politics and thought them masculinematters about which no lady could intelligently concern herself. But it gave Gerald pleasure to airhis views, and Ellen was unfailingly thoughtful of her husbands pleasure.

While Gerald launched forth on his news. Mammy set the plates before her mistress, golden-topped biscuits, breast of fried chicken and a yellow yam open and steaming, with melted butterdripping from it. Mammy pinched small Jack, and he hastened to his business of slowly swishingthe paper ribbons back and forth behind Ellen. Mammy stood beside the table, watching everyforkful that traveled from plate to mouth, as though she intended to force the food down Ellensthroat should she see signs of flagging. Ellen ate diligently, but Scarlett could see that she was tootired to know what she was eating. Only Mammys implacable face forced her to it.

When the dish was empty and Gerald only midway in his remarks on the thievishness ofYankees who wanted to free darkies and yet offered no penny to pay for their freedom, Ellen rose.

Well be having prayers? he questioned, reluctantly.

Yes. It is so latewhy, it is actually ten oclock, as the clock with coughing and tinny thumpsmarked the hour. Carreen should have been asleep long ago. The lamp, please. Pork, and myprayer book, Mammy.

Prompted by Mammys hoarse whisper. Jack set his fly-brush in the corner and removed thedishes, while Mammy fumbled in the sideboard drawer for Ellens worn prayer book. Pork,tiptoeing, reached the ring in the chain and drew the lamp slowly down until the table top wasbrightly bathed in light and the ceiling receded into shadows. Ellen arranged her skirts and sank tothe floor on her knees, laying the open prayer book on the table before her and clasping her handsupon it Gerald knelt beside her, and Scarlett and Suellen took their accustomed places on theopposite side of the table, folding their voluminous petticoats in pads under their knees, so theywould ache less from contact with the hard floor. Carreen, who was small for her age, could notkneel comfortably at the table and so knelt facing a chair, her elbows on the seat. She liked thisposition, for she seldom failed to go to sleep during prayers and, in this posture, it escaped hermothers notice.

The house servants shuffled and rustled in the hall to kneel by the doorway, Mammy groaningaloud as she sank down, Pork straight as a ramrod, Rosa and Teena, the maids, graceful in theirspreading bright calicoes, Cookie gaunt and yellow beneath her snowy head rag, and Jack, stupidwith sleep, as far away from Mammys pinching fingers as possible. Their dark eyes gleamedexpectantly, for praying with their white folks was one of the events of the day. The old andcolorful phrases of the litany with its Oriental imagery meant little to them but it satisfied somethingin their hearts, and they always swayed when they chanted the responses: Lord, have mercyon us, Christ, have mercy on us.

Ellen closed her eyes and began praying, her voice rising and falling, lulling and soothing.

Heads bowed in the circle of yellow light as Ellen thanked God for the health and happiness of her home, her family and her negroes.

When she had finished her prayers for those beneath the roof of Tara, her father, mother, sisters,three dead babies and all the poor souls in Purgatory, she clasped her white beads between longfingers and began the Rosary, like the rushing of a soft wind, the responses from black throats andwhite throats rolled back:

Holy Mary, Mother of God, pray for us sinners, now, and at the hour of our death.

Despite her heartache and the pain of unshed tears, a deep sense of quiet and peace fell uponScarlett as it always did at this hour. Some of the disappointment of the day and the dread of themorrow departed from her, leaving a feeling of hope. It was not the lifting up of her heart to Godthat brought this balm, for religion went no more than lip deep with her. It was the sight of hermothers serene face upturned to the throne of God and His saints and angels, praying for blessingson those whom she loved. When Ellen intervened with Heaven, Scarlett felt certain that Heavenheard.

Ellen finished and Gerald, who could never find his beads at prayer time, began furtivelycounting his decade on his fingers. As his voice droned on Scarletts thoughts strayed, in spite ofherself. She knew she should be examining her conscience. Ellen had taught her that at the end ofeach day it was her duty to examine her conscience thoroughly, to admit her numerous faults andpray to God for forgiveness and strength never to repeat them. But Scarlett was examining herheart.

She dropped her head upon her folded hands so that her mother could not see her face, and herthoughts went sadly back to Ashley. How could he be planning to marry Melanie when he reallyloved her, Scarlett? And when he knew how much she loved him? How could he deliberately breakher heart?

Then, suddenly, an idea, shining and new, flashed like a comet through her brain.

Why, Ashley hasnt an idea that Im in love with him!

She almost gasped aloud in the shock of its unexpectedness. Her mind stood still as if paralyzedfor a long, breathless instant, and then raced forward.

How could he know? Ive always acted so prissy and ladylike and touch-me-not around him heprobably thinks I dont care a thing about him except as a friend. Yes, thats why hes neverspoken! He thinks his love is hopeless. And thats why hes looked so

Her mind went swiftly back to those times when she had caught him looking at her in thatstrange manner, when the gray eyes that were such perfect curtains for his thoughts had been wideand naked and had in them a look of torment and despair.

Hes been broken hearted because he thinks Im in love with Brent or Stuart or Cade. Andprobably he thinks that if he cant have me, he might as well please his family and marry Melanie.

But if he knew I did love him

Her volatile spirits shot up from deepest depression to excited happiness. This was the answer toAshleys reticence, to his strange conduct. He didnt know! Her vanity leaped to the aid of herdesire to believe, making belief a certainty. If he knew she loved him, he would hasten to her side.

She had only toOh! she thought rapturously, digging her fingers into her lowered brow. What a fool Ivebeen not to think of this till now! I must think of some way to let him know. He wouldnt marryher if he knew I loved him! How could he?

With a start, she realized that Gerald had finished and her mothers eyes were on her. Hastily shebegan her decade, telling off the beads automatically but with a depth of emotion in her voice thatcaused Mammy to open her eyes and shoot a searching glance at her. As she finished her prayersand Suellen, then Carreen, began their decades, her mind was still speeding onward with herentrancing new thought.

Even now, it wasnt too late! Too often the County had been scandalized by elopements whenone or the other of the participating parties was practically at the altar with a third. And Ashleysengagement had not even been announced yet! Yes, there was plenty of time!

If no love lay between Ashley and Melanie but only a promise given long ago, then why wasntit possible for him to break that promise and marry her? Surely he would do it, if he knew that she,Scarlett loved him. She must find some way to let him know. She would find some way! And thenScarlett came abruptly out of her dream of delight, for she had neglected to make the responsesand her mother was looking at her reprovingly. As she resumed the ritual, she opened her eyesbriefly and cast a quick glance around the room. The kneeling figures, the soft glow of the lamp,the dim shadows where the negroes swayed, even the familiar objects that had been so hateful toher sight an hour ago, in an instant took on the color of her own emotions, and the room seemedonce more a lovely place. She would never forget this moment or this scene!

Virgin most faithful, her mother intoned. The Litany of the Virgin was beginning, andobediently Scarlett responded: Pray for us, as Ellen praised in soft contralto the attributes of theMother of God.

As always since childhood, this was, for Scarlett, a moment for adoration of Ellen, rather thanthe Virgin. Sacrilegious though it might be, Scarlett always saw, through her closed eyes, theupturned face of Ellen and not the Blessed Virgin, as the ancient phrases were repeated. Health ofthe Sick, Seat of Wisdom, Refuge of Sinners, Mystical Rosethey were beautiful becausethey were the attributes of Ellen. But tonight became of the exaltation of her own spirit, Scarlettfound in the whole ceremonial, the softly spoken words, the murmur of the responses, a surpassingbeauty beyond any that she had ever experienced before. And her heart went up to God in sincerethankfulness that a pathway for her feet had been openedout of her misery and straight to thearms of Ashley.

When the last Amen sounded, they all rose, somewhat stiffly, Mammy being hauled to her feetby the combined efforts of Teena and Rosa. Pork took a long spiller from the mantelpiece, lit itfrom the lamp flame and went into the hall. Opposite the winding stair stood a walnut sideboard,too large for use in the dining room, bearing on its wide top several lamps and a long row ofcandles in candlesticks. Pork lit one lamp and three candles and, with the pompous dignity of afirst chamberlain of the royal bedchamber lighting a king and queen to their rooms, he led the procession up the stairs, holding the light high above his head. Ellen, on Geralds arm, followedhim, and the girls, each taking her own candlestick, mounted after them.

Scarlett entered her room, set the candle on the tall chest of drawers and fumbled in the darkcloset for the dancing dress that needed stitching. Throwing it across her arm, she crossed the hallquietly. The door of her parents bedroom was slightly ajar and, before she could knock, Ellensvoice, low but stern, came to her ears.

Mr. OHara, you must dismiss Jonas Wilkerson.

Gerald exploded, And where will I be getting another overseer who wouldnt be cheating meout of my eye-teeth?

He must be dismissed, immediately, tomorrow morning. Big Sam is a good foreman and he cantake over the duties until you can hire another overseer.

Ah, ha! came Geralds voice. So, I understand! Then the worthy Jonas sired the

He must be dismissed.

So, he is the father of Emmie Slatterys baby, thought Scarlett Oh, well. What else can youexpect from a Yankee man and a white-trash girl?

Then, after a discreet pause which gave Geralds splutterings time to die away, she knocked onthe door and handed the dress to her mother.

By the time Scarlett had undressed and blown out the candle, her plan for tomorrow had workeditself out in every detail. It was a simple plan, for, with Geralds single-mindedness of purpose, hereyes were centered on the goal and she thought only of the most direct steps by which to reach it.

First, she would be prideful, as Gerald had commanded. From the moment she arrived atTwelve Oaks, she would be her gayest, most spirited self. No one would suspect that she had everbeen downhearted because of Ashley and Melanie. And she would flirt with every man there. Thatwould be cruel to Ashley, but it would make him yearn for her all the more. She wouldnt overlooka man of marriageable age, from ginger-whiskered old Frank Kennedy, who was Suellens beau,on down to shy, quiet, blushing Charles Hamilton, Melanies brother. They would swarm aroundher like bees around a hive, and certainly Ashley would be drawn from Melanie to join the circle ofher admirers. Then somehow she would maneuver to get a few minutes alone with him, away fromthe crowd. She hoped everything would work out that way, because it would be more difficultotherwise. But if Ashley didnt make the first move, she would simply have to do it herself.

When they were finally alone, he would have fresh in his mind the picture of the other menthronging about her, he would be newly impressed with the fact that every one of them wanted her,and that look of sadness and despair would be in his eyes. Then she would make him happy againby letting him discover that popular though she was, she preferred him above any other man in allthe world. And when she admitted it, modestly and sweetly, she would look a thousand thingsmore. Of course, she would do it all in a ladylike way. She wouldnt even dream of saying to himboldly that she loved himthat would never do. But the manner of telling him was a detail thattroubled her not at all. She had managed such situations before and she could do it again.

Lying in the bed with the moonlight streaming dimly over her, she pictured the whole scene in her mind. She saw the look of surprise and happiness that would come over his face when herealized that she really loved him, and she heard the words he would say asking her to be his wife.

Naturally, she would have to say then that she simply couldnt think of marrying a man when hewas engaged to another girl, but he would insist and finally she would let herself be persuaded.

Then they would decide to run off to Jonesboro that very afternoon andWhy, by this time tomorrow night, she might be Mrs. Ashley Wilkes!

She sat up in bed, hugging her knees, and for a long happy moment she was Mrs. Ashley WilkesAshleys bride! Then a slight chill entered her heart. Suppose it didnt work out this way?

Suppose Ashley didnt beg her to run away with him? Resolutely she pushed the thought from hermind.

I wont think of that now, she said firmly. If I think of it now, it will upset me. Theres noreason why things wont come out the way I want themif he loves me. And I know he does!

She raised her chin and her pale, black-fringed eyes sparkled in the moonlight. Ellen had nevertold her that desire and attainment were two different matters; life had not taught her that the racewas not to the swift. She lay in the silvery shadows with courage rising and made the plans that asixteen-year-old makes when life has been so pleasant that defeat is an impossibility and a prettydress and a clear complexion are weapons to vanquish fate.

Chapter 5

IT WAS TEN OCLOCK in the morning. The day was warm for April and the golden sunlightstreamed, brilliantly into Scarletts room through the blue curtains of the wide windows. Thecream-colored walls glowed with light and the depths of the mahogany furniture gleamed deep redlike wine, while the floor glistened as if it were glass, except where the rag rugs covered it andthey were spots of gay color.

Already summer was in the air, the first hint of Georgia summer when the high tide of springgives way reluctantly before a fiercer heat. A balmy, soft warmth poured into the room, heavy withvelvety smells, redolent of many blossoms, of newly fledged trees and of the moist, freshly turnedred earth. Through the window Scarlett could see the bright riot of the twin lanes of daffodilsbordering the graveled driveway and the golden masses of yellow jessamine spreading flowerysprangles modestly to the earth like crinolines. The mockingbirds and the jays, engaged in their oldfeud for possession of the magnolia tree beneath her window, were bickering, the jays strident,acrimonious, the mockers sweet voiced and plaintive.

Such a glowing morning usually called Scarlett to the window, to lean arms on the broad sill anddrink in the scents and sounds of Tara. But, today she had no eye for sun or azure sky beyond ahasty thought, Thank God, it isnt raining. On the bed lay the apple-green, watered-silk balldress with its festoons of ecru lace, neatly packed in a large cardboard box. It was ready to becarried to Twelve Oaks to be donned before the dancing began, but Scarlett shrugged at the sight ofit. If her plans were successful, she would not wear that dress tonight. Long before the ball began,she and Ashley would be on their way to Jonesboro to be married. The troublesome question was what dress should she wear to the barbecue?

What dress would best set off her charms and make her most irresistible to Ashley? Since eightoclock she had been trying on and rejecting dresses, and now she stood dejected and irritable inlace pantalets, linen corset cover and three billowing lace and linen petticoats. Discarded garmentslay about her on the floor, the bed, the chairs, in bright heaps of color and straying ribbons.

The rose organdie with long pink sash was becoming, but she had worn it last summer whenMelanie visited Twelve Oaks and shed be sure to remember it. And might be catty enough tomention it. The black bombazine, with its puffed sleeves and princess lace collar, set off her whiteskin superbly, but it did make her look a trifle elderly. Scarlett peered anxiously in the mirror at hersixteen-year-old face as if expecting to see wrinkles and sagging chin muscles. It would never doto appear sedate and elderly before Melanies sweet youthfulness. The lavender barred muslin wasbeautiful with those wide insets of lace and net about the hem, but it had never suited her type. Itwould suit Carreens delicate profile and wishy-washy expression perfectly, but Scarlett felt that itmade her look like a schoolgirl. It would never do to appear schoolgirlish beside Melanies poisedself. The green plaid taffeta, frothing with flounces and each flounce edged in green velvet ribbon,was most becoming, in fact her favorite dress, for it darkened her eyes to emerald. But there wasunmistakably a grease spot on the front of the basque. Of course, her brooch could be pinned overthe spot, but perhaps Melanie had sharp eyes. There remained varicolored cotton dresses whichScarlett felt were not festive enough for the occasion, ball dresses and the green sprigged muslinshe had worn yesterday. But it was an afternoon dress. It was not suitable for a barbecue, for it hadonly tiny puffed sleeves and the neck was low enough for a dancing dress. But there was nothingelse to do but wear it. After all she was not ashamed of her neck and arms and bosom, even if itwas not correct to show them in the morning.

As she stood before the mirror and twisted herself about to get a side view, she thought thatthere was absolutely nothing about her figure to cause her shame. Her neck was short but roundedand her arms plump and enticing. Her breasts, pushed high by her stays, were very nice breasts.

She had never had to sew tiny rows of silk ruffles in the lining of her basques, as most sixteenyear-old girls did, to give their figures the desired curves and fullness. She was glad she hadinherited Ellens slender white hands and tiny feet, and she wished she had Ellens height, too, buther own height pleased her very well. What a pity legs could not be shown, she thought, pulling upher petticoats and regretfully viewing them, plump and neat under pantalets. She had such nicelegs. Even the girls at the Fayetteville Academy had admitted as much. And as for her waisttherewas no one in Fayetteville, Jonesboro or in three counties, for that matter, who had so small awaist.

The thought of her waist brought her back to practical matters. The green muslin measuredseventeen inches about the waist, and Mammy had laced her for the eighteen-inch bombazine.

Mammy would have to lace her tighter. She pushed open the door, listened and heard Mammysheavy tread in the downstairs hall. She shouted for her impatiently, knowing she could raise hervoice with impunity, as Ellen was in the smokehouse, measuring out the days food to Cookie.

Some folks thinks as how Ah kin fly, grumbled Mammy, shuffling up the stairs. She enteredpuffing, with the expression of one who expects battle and welcomes it. In her large black handswas a tray upon which food smoked, two large yams covered with butter, a pile of buckwheat cakes dripping syrup, and a large slice of ham swimming in gravy. Catching sight of Mammysburden, Scarletts expression changed from one of minor irritation to obstinate belligerency. In theexcitement of trying on dresses she had forgotten Mammys ironclad rule that, before going to anyparty, the OHara girls must be crammed so full of food at home they would be unable to eat anyrefreshments at the party.

Its no use. I wont eat it. You can just take it back to the kitchen.

Mammy set the tray on the table and squared herself, hands on hips.

Yasm, you is! Ah ain figgerin on havin happen whut happen at dat las barbecue wen Ahwuz too sick frum dem chittlins Ah et ter fetch you no tray befo you went. You is gwine eat eveybite of dis.

I am not! Now, come here and lace me tighter because we are late already. I heard the carriagecome round to the front of the house.

Mammys tone became wheedling.

Now, Miss Scarlett, you be good an come eat jesa lil. Miss Carreen an Miss Suellen done eatall deyn.

They would, said Scarlett contemptuously. They havent any more spirit than a rabbit. But Iwont! Im through with trays. Im not forgetting the time I ate a whole tray and went to theCalverts and they had ice cream out of ice theyd brought all the way from Savannah, and Icouldnt eat but a spoonful. Im going to have a good time today and eat as much as I please.

At this defiant heresy, Mammys brow lowered with indignation. What a young miss could doand what she could not do were as different as black and white in Mammys mind; there was nomiddle ground of deportment between. Suellen and Carreen were clay in her powerful hands andharkened respectfully to her warning. But it had always been a struggle to teach Scarlett that mostof her natural impulses were unladylike. Mammys victories over Scarlett were hard-won andrepresented guile unknown to the white mind.

Ef you doan care bout how folks talks bout dis fambly, Ah does, she rumbled. Ah ain

gwine stand by an have eveybody at de pahty sayin how you ain fotched up right. Ah has toleyou an tole you dat you kin allus tell a lady by dat she eat lak a bird. An Ah ain aimin ter haveyou go ter Mist Wilkes an eat lak a feel han an gobble lak a hawg.

Mother is a lady and she eats, countered Scarlett.

Wen you is mahied, you kin eat, too, retorted Mammy. Wen Miss Ellen yo age, she never etnuthin wen she went out, an needer yo Aunt Pauline nor yo Aunt Eulalie. An dey all donemahied. Young misses whut eats heavy mos generly doan never ketch husbands.

I dont believe it. At that barbecue when you were sick and I didnt eat beforehand, AshleyWilkes told me he liked to see a girl with a healthy appetite.

Mammy shook her head ominously.

Whut gempmums says an whut dey thinks is two diffunt things. An Ah ain noticed Mist

Ashley axing fer ter mahy you.

Scarlett scowled, started to speak sharply and then caught herself. Mammy had her there andthere was no argument. Seeing the obdurate look on Scarletts face, Mammy picked up the trayand, with the bland guile of her race, changed her tactics. As she started for the door, she sighed.

Wellm, awright. Ah wuz tellin Cookie wile she wuz a-fixin dis tray, You kin sho tell a ladyby whut she doan eat, an Ah say ter Cookie, Ah ain seed no wite lady who et lessn Miss MellyHamilton did las time she wuz visitin Mist AshleyAh means, visitin Miss India.

Scarlett shot a look of sharp suspicion at her, but Mammys broad face carried only a look ofinnocence and of regret that Scarlett was not the lady Melanie Hamilton was.

Put down that tray and come lace me tighter, said Scarlett irritably. And Ill try to eat a littleafterwards. If I ate now I couldnt lace tight enough.

Cloaking her triumph, Mammy set down the tray.

Whut mah lamb gwine wear?

That, answered Scarlett, pointing at the fluffy mass of green flowered muslin. InstantlyMammy was in arms.

No, you ain. It ain fittin fer mawnin. You kain show yo buzzum befo three oclock an datdress ain got no neck an no sleeves. An youll git freckled sho as you born, an Ah ain figgerin

on you gittin freckled affer all de buttermilk Ah been puttin on you all dis winter, bleachin demfreckles you got at Savannah settin on de beach. Ah sho gwine speak ter yo Ma bout you.

If you say one word to her before Im dressed I wont eat a bite, said Scarlett coolly. Motherwont have time to send me back to change once Im dressed.

Mammy sighed resignedly, beholding herself outguessed. Between the two evils, it was better tohave Scarlett wear an afternoon dress at a morning barbecue than to have her gobble like a hog.

Hole onter sumpin an suck in yo breaf, she commanded.

Scarlett obeyed, bracing herself and catching firm hold of one of the bedposts. Mammy pulledand jerked vigorously and, as the tiny circumference of whalebone-girdled waist grew smaller, aproud, fond look came into her eyes.

Ain nobody got a wais lak mah lamb, she said approvingly. Evey time Ah pulls MissSuellen littler dan twenty inches, she up an faint.

Pooh! gasped Scarlett, speaking with difficulty. I never fainted in my life.

Well, twouldn do no hahm ef you wuz ter faint now an den, advised Mammy. You is sobrash sometimes, Miss Scarlett. Ah been aimin ter tell you, it jes doan look good de way youdoan faint bout snakes an mouses an sech. Ah doan mean round home but wen you is out incompny. AnAh has tole you an

Oh, hurry! Dont talk so much. Ill catch a husband. See if I dont, even if I dont scream andfaint. Goodness, but my stays are tight! Put on the dress.

Mammy carefully dropped the twelve yards of green sprigged muslin over the mountainouspetticoats and hooked up the back of the tight, low-cut basque.

You keep yo shawl on yo shoulders wen you is in de sun, an doan you go takin off yo hatwen you is wahm, she commanded. Elsewise you be comin home lookin brown lak Ole MizSlattery. Now, you come eat, honey, but doan eat too fas. No use havin it come right back upagin.

Scarlett obediently sat down before the tray, wondering if she would be able to get any food intoher stomach and still have room to breathe. Mammy plucked a large towel from the washstand andcarefully tied it around Scarletts neck, spreading the white folds over her lap. Scarlett began onthe ham, because she liked ham, and forced it down.

I wish to Heaven I was married, she said resentfully as she attacked the yams with loathing.

Tin tired of everlastingly being unnatural and never doing anything I want to do. Im tired ofacting like I dont eat more than a bird, and walking when I want to run and saying I feel faint aftera waltz, when I could dance for two days and never get tired. Im tired of saying, How wonderfulyou are! to fool men who havent got one-half the sense Ive got, and Im tired of pretending Idont know anything, so men can tell me things and feel important while theyre doing it ... I canteat another bite.

Try a hot cake, said Mammy inexorably.

Why is it a girl has to be so silly to catch a husband?

Ah specs its kase gempmums doan know whut dey wants. Dey jes knows whut dey thinks deywants. An givin dem whut dey thinks dey wants saves a pile of mizry an bein a ole maid. An

dey thinks dey wants mousy lil gals wid birds tastes an no sense at all. It doan make a gempmumfeel lak mahyin a lady ef he suspicions she got mo sense dan he has.

Dont you suppose men get surprised after theyre married to find that their wives do havesense?

Well, its too late den. Deys already mahied. Sides, gempmums specs dey wives ter havesense.

Some day Im going to do and say everything I want to do and say, and if people dont like it Idont care.

No, you ain, said Mammy grimly. Not while Ah got breaf. You eat dem cakes. Sop dem inde gravy, honey.

I dont think Yankee girls have to act like such fools. When we were at Saratoga last year, Inoticed plenty of them acting like they had right good sense and in front of men, too.

Mammy snorted.

Yankee gals! Yasm, Ah guess dey speaks dey minds awright, but Ah ain noticed many of demgittin proposed ter at Saratoga.

But Yankees must get married, argued Scarlett. They dont just grow. They must get marriedand have children. Theres too many of them.

Men mahys dem fer dey money, said Mammy firmly.

Scarlett sopped the wheat cake in the gravy and put it in her mouth. Perhaps there was something to what Mammy said. There must be something in it, for Ellen said the same things, indifferent and more delicate words. In fact, the mothers of all her girl friends impressed on theirdaughters the necessity of being helpless, clinging, doe-eyed creatures. Really, it took a lot of senseto cultivate and hold such a pose. Perhaps she had been too brash. Occasionally she-had arguedwith Ashley and frankly aired her opinions. Perhaps this and her healthy enjoyment of walking andriding had turned him from her to the frail Melanie. Perhaps if she changed her tactics But shefelt that if Ashley succumbed to premeditated feminine tricks, she could never respect him as shenow did. Any man who was fool enough to fall for a simper, a faint and an Oh, how wonderfulyou are! wasnt worth having. But they all seemed to like it.

If she had used the wrong tactics with Ashley in the pastwell, that was the past and done with.

Today she would use different ones, the right ones. She wanted him and she had only a few hoursin which to get him. If fainting, or pretending to faint, would do the trick, then she would faint. Ifsimpering, coquetry or empty-headedness would attract him, she would gladly play the flirt and bemore empty-headed than even Cathleen Calvert. And if bolder measures were necessary, she wouldtake them. Today was the day!

There was no one to tell Scarlett that her own personality, frighteningly vital though it was, wasmore attractive than any masquerade she might adopt. Had she been, told, she would have beenpleased but unbelieving. And the civilization of which she was a part would have been unbelievingtoo, for at no time, before or since, had so low a premium been placed on feminine naturalness.

As the carriage bore her down the red road toward the Wilkes plantation, Scarlett had a feeling ofguilty pleasure that neither her mother nor Mammy was with the party. There would be no one atthe barbecue who, by delicately lifted brows or out-thrust underlip, could interfere with her plan ofaction. Of course, Suellen would be certain to tell tales tomorrow, but if an went as Scarlett hoped,the excitement of the family over her engagement to Ashley or her elopement would more thanoverbalance their displeasure. Yes, she was very glad Ellen had been forced to stay at home.

Gerald, primed with brandy, had given Jonas Wilkerson his dismissal that morning and Ellenhad remained at Tara to go over the accounts of the plantation before he took his departure. Scarletthad kissed her mother good-by in the little office where she sat before the tall secretary with itspaper-stuffed pigeonholes. Jonas Wilkerson, hat in hand, stood beside her, his sallow tight-skinnedface hardly concealing the fury of hate that possessed him at being so unceremoniously turned outof the best overseers job in the County. And all because of a bit of minor philandering. He hadtold Gerald over and over that Emmie Slatterys baby might have been fathered by any one of adozen men as easily as himselfan idea in which Gerald concurredbut that had not altered hiscase so far as Ellen was concerned. Jonas hated all Southerners. He hated their cool courtesy tohim and their contempt for his social status, so inadequately covered by their courtesy. He hatedEllen OHara above anyone else, for she was the epitome of all that he hated in Southerners.

Mammy, as head woman of the plantation, had remained to help Ellen, and it was Dilcey whorode on the drivers seat beside Toby, the girls dancing dresses in a long box across her lap. Geraldrode beside the carriage on his big hunter, warm with brandy and pleased with himself for havinggotten through with the unpleasant business of Wilkerson so speedily. He had shoved the re sponsibility onto Ellen, and her disappointment at missing the barbecue and the gathering of herfriends did not enter his mind; for it was a fine spring day and his fields were beautiful and thebirds were singing and he felt too young and frolicsome to think of anyone else. Occasionally heburst out with Peg in a Low-backed Car and other Irish ditties or the more lugubrious lament forRobert Emmet, She is far from the land where her young hero sleeps.

He was happy, pleasantly excited over the prospect of spending the day shouting about theYankees and the war, and proud of his three pretty daughters in their bright spreading hoop skirtsbeneath foolish little lace parasols. He gave no thought to his conversation of the day before withScarlett, for it had completely slipped his mind. He only thought that she was pretty and a greatcredit to him and that, today, her eyes were as green as the hills of Ireland. The last thought madehim think better of himself, for it had a certain poetic ring to it, and so he favored the girls with aloud and slightly off-key rendition of The Wearin o the Green.

Scarlett, looking at him with the affectionate contempt that mothers feel for small swaggeringsons, knew that he would be very drunk by sundown. Coming home in the dark, he would try, asusual, to jump every fence between Twelve Oaks and Tara and, she hoped, by the mercy ofProvidence and the good sense of his horse, would escape breaking his neck. He would disdain thebridge and swim his horse through the river and come home roaring, to be put to bed on the sofa inthe office by Pork who always waited up with a lamp in the front hall on such occasions.

He would ruin his new gray broadcloth suit, which would cause him to swear horribly in themorning and tell Ellen at great length how his horse fell off the bridge in the darknessa palpablelie which would fool no one but which would be accepted by all and make him feel very clever.

Pa is a sweet, selfish, irresponsible darling, Scarlett thought, with a surge of affection for him.

She felt so excited and happy this morning that she included the whole world, as well as Gerald, inher affection. She was pretty and she knew it; she would have Ashley for her own before the daywas over; the sun was warm and tender and the glory of the Georgia spring was spread before hereyes. Along the roadside the blackberry brambles were concealing with softest green the savagered gulches cut by the winters rains, and the bare granite boulders pushing up through the redearth were being draped with sprangles of Cherokee roses and compassed about by wild violets ofpalest purple hue. Upon the wooded hills above the river, the dogwood blossoms lay glistening andwhite, as if snow still lingered among the greenery. The flowering crab trees were bursting theirbuds and rioting from delicate white to deepest pink and, beneath the trees where the sunshinedappled the pine straw, the wild honeysuckle made a varicolored carpet of scarlet and orange androse. There was a faint wild fragrance of sweet shrub on the breeze and the world smelted goodenough to eat.

Ill remember how beautiful this day is till I die, thought Scarlett. Perhaps it will be mywedding day!

And she thought with a tingling in her heart how she and Ashley might ride swiftly through thisbeauty of blossom and greenery this very afternoon, or tonight by moonlight, toward Jonesboroand a preacher. Of course, she would have to be remarried by a priest from Atlanta, but that wouldbe something for Ellen and Gerald to worry about. She quailed a little as she thought how whitewith mortification Ellen would be at hearing that her daughter had eloped with another girls fianc, but she knew Ellen would forgive her when she saw her happiness. And Gerald wouldscold and bawl but, for all his remarks of yesterday about not wanting her to marry Ashley, hewould be pleased beyond words at an alliance between his family and the Wilkes.

But thatll be something to worry about after Im married, she thought, tossing the worry fromher.

It was impossible to feel anything but palpitating joy in this warm sun, in this spring, with thechimneys of Twelve Oaks just beginning to show on the hill across the river.

Ill live there all my life and Ill see fifty springs like this and maybe more, and Ill tell mychildren and my grandchildren how beautiful this spring was, lovelier than any theyll ever see.

She was so happy at this thought that she joined in the last chorus of The Wearin o the Green

and won Geralds shouted approval.

I dont know why youre so happy this morning, said Suellen crossly, for the thought stillrankled in her mind that she would look far better in Scarletts green silk dancing frock than itsrightful owner would. And why was Scarlett always so selfish about lending her clothes andbonnets? And why did Mother always back her up, declaring green was not Suellens color? Youknow as well as I do that Ashleys engagement is going to be announced tonight. Pa said so thismorning. And I know youve been sweet on him for months.

Thats all you know, said Scarlett, putting out her tongue and refusing to lose her good humor.

How surprised Miss Sue would be by this time tomorrow morning!

Susie, you know thats not so, protested Carreen, shocked. Its Brent that Scarlett caresabout.

Scarlett turned smiling green eyes upon her younger sister, wondering how anyone could be sosweet. The whole family knew that Carreens thirteen-year-old heart was set upon Brent Tarleton,who never gave her a thought except as Scarletts baby sister. When Ellen was not present, theOHaras teased her to tears about him.

Darling, I dont care a thing about Brent, declared Scarlett, happy enough to be generous.

And he doesnt care a thing about me. Why, hes waiting for you to grow up!

Carreens round little face became pink, as pleasure struggled with incredulity.

Oh, Scarlett, really?

Scarlett, you know Mother said Carreen was too young to think about beaux yet, and there yougo putting ideas in her head.

Well, go and tattle and see if I care, replied Scarlett. You want to hold Sissy back, becauseyou know shes going to be prettier than you in a year or so.

Youll be keeping civil tongues in your heads this day, or Ill be taking me crop to you,

warned Gerald. Now whist! Is it wheels Im hearing? Thatll be the Tarletons or the Fontaines.

As they neared the intersecting road that came down the thickly wooded hill from Mimosa andFairhill, the sound of hooves and carriage wheels became plainer and clamorous feminine voicesraised in pleasant dispute sounded from behind the screen of trees. Gerald, riding ahead, pulled up his hone and signed to Toby to stop the carriage where the two roads met.

Tis the Tarleton ladies, he announced to his daughters, his florid face abeam, for exceptingEllen there was no lady in the County he liked more than the red-haired Mrs. Tarleton. And tisherself at the reins. Ah, theres a woman with fine hands for a horse! Feather light and strong asrawhide, and pretty enough to kiss for all that. Mores the pity none of you have such hands, headded, casting fond but reproving glances at his girls. With Carreen afraid of the poor beasts andSue with hands tike sadirons when it comes to reins and you, Puss

Well, at any rate Ive never been thrown, cried Scarlett indignantly. And Mrs. Tarleton takesa toss at every hunt.

And breaks a collar bone like a man, said Gerald. No fainting, no fussing. Now, no more ofit, for here she comes.

He stood up in his stirrups and took off his hat with sweep, as the Tarleton carriage, overflowing with girls in bright dresses and parasols and flutteri(a) ng veils, came into view, with Mrs.

Tarleton on the box as Gerald had said. With her four daughters, their mammy and their balldresses in long cardboard boxes crowding the carriage, there was no room for the coachman. And,besides, Beatrice Tarleton never willingly permitted anyone, black or white, to hold reins when herarms were out of slings. Frail, fine-boned, so white of skin that her flaming hair seemed to havedrawn all the color from her face into its vital burnished mass, she was nevertheless possessed ofexuberant health and untiring energy. She had borne eight children, as red of hair and as full of lifeas she, and had raised them most successfully, so the County said, because she gave them all theloving neglect and the stem discipline she gave the colts she bred. Curb them but dont break theirspirits, was Mrs. Tarletons motto.

She loved horses and talked horses constantly. She understood them and handled them betterthan any man in the County. Colts overflowed the paddock onto the front lawn, even as her eightchildren overflowed the rambling house on the hill, and colts and sons and daughters and huntingdogs tagged after her as she went about the plantation. She credited her horses, especially her redmare, Nellie, with human intelligence; and if the cares of the house kept her busy beyond the timewhen she expected to take her daily ride, she put the sugar bowl in the hands of some smallpickaninny and said: Give Nellie a handful and tell her Ill be out terrectly.

Except on rare occasions she always wore her riding habit, for whether she rode or not shealways expected to ride and in that expectation put on her habit upon arising. Each morning, rainor shine, Nellie was saddled and walked up and down in front of the house, waiting for the timewhen Mrs. Tarleton could spare hour away from her duties. But Fairhill was a difficult plantationtomanageandsparetime(an) hard to get, and more often than not Nellie walked up anddown riderless hour after hour, while Beatrice Tarleton went through the day with the skirt of herhabit absently looped over her arm and six inches of shining boot showing below it.

Today, dressed in dull black silk over unfashionably narrow hoops, she still looked as though inher habit, for the dress was as severely tailored as her riding costume and the small black hat withHa long black plume perched over one warm, twinkling, brown eye was a replica of the batteredold hat she used for hunting.

She waved her whip when she saw Gerald and drew her dancing pair of red horses to a halt, andthe four girls in the back of the carriage leaned out and gave such vociferous cries of greeting thatthe team pranced in alarm. To a casual observer it would seem that years had passed since theTarletons had seen the OHaras, instead of only two days. But they were a sociable family andliked their neighbors, especially the OHara girls. That is, they liked Suellen and Carreen. No girlin the County, with the possible exception of the empty-headed Cathleen Calvert, really likedScarlett.

In summers, the County averaged a barbecue and ball nearly every week, but to the red-hairedTarletons with their enormous capacity for enjoying themselves, each barbecue and each ball wasas exciting as if it were the fast they had ever attended. They were a pretty, buxom quartette, socrammed into the carriage that their hoops and flounces overlapped and their parasols nudged andbumped together above their wide leghorn sun hats, crowned with roses and dangling with blackvelvet chin ribbons. All shades of red hair were represented beneath these hats, Hettys plain redhair, Camillas strawberry blonde, Randas coppery auburn and small Betsys carrot top.

Thats a fine bevy. Mam, said Gerald gallantly, reining his horse alongside the carriage. Butits far theyll go to beat their mother.

Mrs. Tarleton rolled her red-brown eyes and sucked in her tower lip in burlesqued appreciation,and the girls cried, Ma, stop making, eyes or well tell Pa! I vow, Mr. OHara, she never gives usa chance when theres a handsome man like you around!

Scarlett laughed with the rest at these sallies but, as always, the freedom with which theTarletons treated their mother came as a shock. They acted as if she were one of themselves andnot a day over sixteen. To Scarlett, the very idea of saying such things to her own mother was almostsacrilegious. And yetand yetthere was something very pleasant about the Tarleton girls

relations with their mother, and they adored her for all that they criticized and scolded and teasedher. Not, Scarlett loyally hastened to tell herself, that she would prefer a mother like Mrs. Tarletonto Ellen, but still it would be fun to romp with a mother. She knew that even that thought wasdisrespectful to Ellen and felt ashamed of it. She knew no such troublesome thoughts everdisturbed the brains under the four flaming thatches in the carriage and, as always when she feltherself different from her neighbors, an irritated confusion fell upon her.

Quick though her brain was, it was not made for analysis, but she half-consciously realized that,for all the Tarleton girls were as unruly as colts and wild as March hares, there was an unworriedsingle-mindedness about them that was part of their inheritance. On both their mothers and theirfathers side they were Georgians, north Georgians, only a generation away from pioneers. Theywere sure of themselves and of their environment. They knew instinctively what they were about,as did the Wilkeses, though in widely divergent ways, and in them there was no such conflict asfrequently raged in Scarletts bosom where the blood of a soft-voiced, overbred Coast aristocratmingled with the shrewd, earthy blood of an Irish peasant. Scarlett wanted to respect and adore hermother like an idol and to rumple her hair and tease her too. And she knew she should bealtogether one way or the other. It was the same conflicting emotion that made her desire to appeara delicate and high-bred lady with boys and to be, as well, a hoyden who was not above a fewkisses.

Wheres Ellen this morning? asked Mrs. Tarleton.

Shes after discharging our overseer and stayed home to go over the accounts with him.

Wheres himself and the lads?

Oh, they rode over to Twelve Oaks hours agoto sample the punch and see if it was strongenough, I dare say, as if they wouldnt have from now till tomorrow morning to do it! Im going toask John Wilkes to keep them overnight, even if he has to bed them down in the stable. Five menin their cups are just too much for me. Up to three, I do very well but

Gerald hastily interrupted to change the subject He could feel his own daughters snickeringbehind his back as they remembered in what condition he had come home from the Wilkeses lastbarbecue the autumn before.

And why arent you riding today, Mrs. Tarleton? Sure, you dont look yourself at all withoutNellie. Its a stentor, you are.

A stentor, me ignorant broth of a boy! cried Mrs. Tarleton, aping his brogue. You mean acentaur. Stentor was a man with a voice like a brass gong.

Stentor or centaur, tis no matter, answered Gerald, unruffled by his error. And tis a voicelike brass you have, Mam, when youre urging on the hounds, so it is.

Thats one on you, Ma, said Hetty. I told you you yelled like a Comanche whenever you sawa fox.

But not as loud as you yell when Mammy washes your ears, returned Mrs. Tarleton. And yousixteen! Well, as to why Im not riding today, Nellie foaled early this morning.

Did she now! cried Gerald with real interest, his Irishmans passion for horses shining in hiseyes, and Scarlett again felt the sense of shock in comparing her mother with Mrs. Tarleton. ToEllen, mares never foaled nor cows calved. In fact, hens almost didnt lay eggs. Ellen ignored thesematters, completely. But Mrs. Tarleton had no such reticences.

A little filly, was it?

No, a fine little stallion with legs two yards long. You must ride over and see him, Mr. OHara.

Hes a real Tarleton horse. Hes as red as Hettys curls.

And looks a lot like Hetty, too, said Camilla, and then disappeared shrieking amid a welter ofskirts and pantalets and bobbing hats, as Hetty, who did have a long face, began pinching her.

My fillies are feeling their oats this morning, said Mrs. Tarleton. Theyve been kicking uptheir heels ever since we heard the news this morning about Ashley and that little cousin of hisfrom Atlanta. Whats her name? Melanie? Bless the child, shes a sweet little thing, but I can neverremember either her name or her face. Our cook is the broad wife of the Wilkes butler, and he wasover last night with the news that the engagement would be announced tonight and Cookie told usthis morning. The girls are all excited about it, though I cant see why. Everybodys known foryears that Ashley would marry her, that is, if he didnt marry one of his Burr cousins from Macon.

Just like Honey Wilkes is going to marry Melanies brother, Charles. Now, tell me, Mr. OHara, isit illegal for the Wilkes to marry outside of their family? Because if

Scarlett did not hear the rest of the laughing words. For one short instant, it was as though thesun had ducked behind a cool cloud, leaving the world in shadow, taking the color out of things.

The freshly green foliage looked sickly, the dogwood pallid, and the flowering crab, so beautifullypink a moment ago, faded and dreary. Scarlett dug her fingers into the upholstery of the carriageand for a moment her parasol wavered. It was one thing to know that Ashley was engaged but itwas another to hear people talk about it so casually. Then her courage flowed strongly back and thesun came out again and the landscape glowed anew. She knew Ashley loved her. That was certain.

And she smiled as she thought how surprised Mrs. Tarleton would be when no engagement wasannounced that nighthow surprised if there were an elopement. And shed tell neighbors what asly boots Scarlett was to sit there and listen to her talk about Melanie when all the time she andAshleyShe dimpled at her own thoughts and Hetty, who had been watching sharply the effect ofher mothers words, sank back with a small puzzled frown.

I dont care what you say, Mr. OHara, Mrs. Tarleton was saying emphatically. Its all wrong,this marrying of cousins. Its bad enough for Ashley to be marrying the Hamilton child, but forHoney to be marrying that pale-looking Charles Hamilton

Honeyll never catch anybody else if she doesnt marry Charlie, said Randa, cruel and securein her own popularity. Shes never had another beau except him. And hes never acted very sweeton her, for all that theyre engaged. Scarlett, you remember how he ran after you last Christmas

Dont be a cat, Miss, said her mother. Cousins shouldnt marry, even second cousins. Itweakens the strain. It isnt like horses. You can breed a mare to a brother or a sire to a daughter andget good results if you know your blood strains, but in people it just doesnt work. You get goodlines, perhaps, but no stamina. You

Now, Mam, Im taking issue with you on that! Can you name me better people than theWilkes? And theyve been intermarrying since Brian Boru was a boy.

And high time they stopped it, for its beginning to show. Oh, not Ashley so much, for hes agood-looking devil, though even he But look at those two washed-out-looking Wilkes girls, poorthings! Nice girls, of course, but washed out And look at little Miss Melanie. Thin as a rail anddelicate enough for the wind to blow away and no spirit at all. Not a notion of her own. No,Mam! Yes, Mam! Thats all she has to say. You see what I mean? That family needs new blood,fine vigorous blood like my red heads or your Scarlett. Now, dont misunderstand me. The Wilkesare fine folks in their way, and you know Im fond of them all, but be frank! They are overbred andinbred too, arent they? Theyll do fine on a dry track, a fast track, but mark my words, I dontbelieve the Wilkes can run on a mud track. I believe the stamina has been bred out of them, andwhen the emergency arises I dont believe they can run against odds. Dry-weather stock. Give mea big horse who can run in any weather! And their intermarrying has made them different fromother folks around here. Always fiddling with the piano or sticking their heads in a book. I dobelieve Ashley would rather read than hunt! Yes, I honestly believe that, Mr. OHara! And just lookat the bones on them. Too slender. They need dams and sires with strength

Ah-ah-hum, said Gerald, suddenly and guiltily aware that the conversation, a most interestingand entirely proper one to him, would seem quite otherwise to Ellen. In fact, he knew she wouldnever recover should she learn that her daughters had been exposed to so frank a conversation. But Mrs. Tarleton was, as usual, deaf to all other ideas when pursuing her favorite topic, breeding,whether it be horses or humans.

I know what Im talking about because I had some cousins who married each other and I giveyou my word their children all turned out as popeyed as bullfrogs, poor things. And when myfamily wanted me to marry a second cousin, I bucked like a colt. I said, No, Ma. Not for me. Mychildren will all have spavins and heaves. Well, Ma fainted when I said that about spavins, but Istood firm and Grandma backed me up. She knew a lot about horse breeding too, you see, and saidI was right. And she helped me run away with Mr. Tarleton. And look at my children! Big andhealthy and not a sickly one or a runt among them, though Boyd is only five feet ten. Now, theWilkes

Not meaning to change the subject, Mam, broke in Gerald hurriedly, for he had noticedCarreens bewildered look and the avid curiosity on Suellens face and feared lest they might askEllen embarrassing questions which would reveal how inadequate a chaperon he was. Puss, he wasglad to notice, appeared to be thinking of other matters as a lady should.

Hetty Tarleton rescued him from his predicament.

Good Heavens, Ma, do lets get on! she cried impatiently. This sun is broiling me and I canjust hear freckles popping out on my neck.

Just a minute, Mam, before you go, said Gerald. But what have you decided to do aboutselling us the horses for the Troop? War may break any day now and the boys want the mattersettled. Its a Clayton County troop and its Clayton County horses we want for them. But you,obstinate creature that you are, are still refusing to sell us your fine beasts.

Maybe there wont be any war, Mrs. Tarleton temporized, her mind diverted completely fromthe Wilkeses odd marriage habits.

Why, Mam, you cant

Ma, Hetty interrupted again, cant you and Mr. OHara talk about the horses at Twelve Oaksas well as here?

Thats just it, Miss Hetty, said Gerald, And I wont be keeping you but one minute by theclock. Well be getting to Twelve Oaks in a little bit, and every man there, old and young, wantingto know about the horses. Ah, but its breaking me heart to see such a fine pretty lady as yourmother so stingy with her beasts! Now, wheres your patriotism, Mrs. Tarleton? Does theConfederacy mean nothing to you at all?

Ma, cried small Betsy, Randas sitting on my dress and Im getting all wrinkled.

Well, push Randa off you, Betsy, and hush. Now, listen to me, Gerald OHara, she retorted,her eyes beginning to snap. Dont you go throwing the Confederacy in my face! I reckon theConfederacy means as much to me as it does to you, me with four boys in the Troop and you withnone. But my boys can take care of themselves and my horses cant. Id gladly give the horses freeof charge if I knew they were going to be ridden by boys I know, gentlemen used to thoroughbreds.

No, I wouldnt hesitate a minute. But let my beauties be at the mercy of backwoodsmen andCrackers who are used to riding mules! No, sir! Id have nightmares thinking they were being ridden with saddle galls and not groomed properly. Do you think Id let ignorant fools ride my tender-mouthed darlings and saw their mouths to pieces and beat them till their spirits were broken? Why,Ive got goose flesh this minute, just thinking about it! No, Mr. OHara, youre mighty nice to wantmy horses, but youd better go to Atlanta and buy some old plugs for your clodhoppers. Theyllnever know the difference.

Ma, cant we please go on? asked Camilla, joining the impatient chorus. You know mightywell youre going to end up giving them your darlings anyhow. When Pa and the boys get throughtalking about the Confederacy needing them and so on, youll cry and let them go.

Mrs. Tarleton grinned and shook the lines.

Ill do no such thing, she said, touching the horses lightly with the whip. The carriage went offswiftly.

Thats a fine woman, said Gerald, putting on his hat and taking his place beside his owncarriage. Drive on, Toby. Well wear her down and get the horses yet. Of course, shes right. Shesright. If a mans not a gentleman, hes no business on a horse. The infantry is the place for him.

But mores the pity, theres not enough planters sons in this County to make up a full troop. Whatdid you say, Puss?

Pa, please ride behind us or in front of us. You kick up such a heap of dust that were choking,

said Scarlett, who felt that she could endure conversation no longer. It distracted her from herthoughts and she was very anxious to arrange both her thoughts and her face in attractive linesbefore reaching Twelve Oaks. Gerald obediently put spurs to his horse and was off in a red cloudafter the Tarleton carriage where he could continue his horsy conversation.

Chapter 6

THEY CROSSED the river and the carriage mounted the hill. Even before Twelve Oaks cameinto view Scarlett saw a haze of smoke hanging lazily in the tops of the tall trees and smelled themingled savory odors of burning hickory logs and roasting pork and mutton.

The barbecue pits, which had been slowly burning since last night, would now be long troughsof rose-red embers, with the meats turning on spits above them and the juices trickling down andhissing into the coals. Scarlett knew that the fragrance carried on the faint breeze came from thegrove of great oaks in the rear of the big house. John Wilkes always held his barbecues there, onthe gentle slope leading down to the rose garden, a pleasant shady place and a far pleasanter place,for instance, than that used by the Calverts. Mrs. Calvert did not like barbecue food and declaredthat the smells remained in the house for days, so her guests always sweltered on a flat unshadedspot a quarter of a mile from the house. But John Wilkes, famed throughout the state for hishospitality, really knew how to give a barbecue.

The long trestled picnic tables, covered with the finest of the Wilkeses linen, always stoodunder the thickest shade, with backless benches on either side; and chairs, hassocks and cushionsfrom the house were scattered about the glade for those who did not fancy the benches. At adistance great enough to keep the smoke away from the guests were the long pits where the meats cooked and the huge iron wash-pots from which the succulent odors of barbecue sauce andBrunswick stew floated. Mr. Wilkes always had at least a dozen darkies busy running back andforth with trays to serve the guests. Over behind the barns there was always another barbecue pit,where the house servants and the coachmen and maids of the guests had their own feast ofhoecakes and yams and chitterlings, that dish of hog entrails so dear to negro hearts, and, inseason, watermelons enough to satiate.

As the smell of crisp fresh pork came to her, Scarlett wrinkled her nose appreciatively, hopingthat by the time it was cooked she would feel some appetite. As it was, she was so full of food andso tightly laced that she feared every moment she was going to belch. That would be fatal, as onlyold men and very old ladies could belch without fear of social disapproval.

They topped the rise and the white house reared its perfect symmetry before her, tall of columns,wide of verandas, flat of roof, beautiful as a woman is beautiful who is so sure of her charm thatshe can be generous and gracious to all. Scarlett loved Twelve Oaks even more than Tara, for it hada stately beauty, a mellowed dignity that Geralds house did not possess.

The wide curving driveway was full of saddle horses and carriages and guests alighting andcalling greetings to friends. Grinning negroes, excited as always at a party, were leading theanimals to the barnyard to be unharnessed and unsaddled for the day. Swarms of children, blackand white, ran yelling about the newly green lawn, playing hopscotch and tag and boasting howmuch they were going to eat. The wide hall which ran from front to back of the house wasswarming with people, and as the OHara carriage drew up at the front steps, Scarlett saw girls incrinolines, bright as butterflies, going up and coming down the stairs from the second floor, armsabout each others waists, stopping to lean over the delicate handrail of the banisters, laughing andcalling to young men in the hall below them.

Through the open French windows, she caught glimpses of the older women seated in thedrawing room, sedate in dark silks as they sat fanning themselves and talking of babies andsicknesses and who had married whom and why. The Wilkes butler, Tom, was hurrying through thehalls, a silver tray in his hands, bowing and grinning, as he offered tall glasses to young men infawn and gray trousers and fine ruffled linen shirts.

The sunny front veranda was thronged with guests. Yes, the whole County was here, thoughtScarlett. The four Tarleton boys and their father leaned against the tall columns, the twins, Stuartand Brent, side by side inseparable as usual, Boyd and Tom with their father, James Tarleton. Mr.

Calvert was standing close by the side of his Yankee wife, who even after fifteen years in Georgianever seemed to quite belong anywhere. Everyone was very polite and kind to her because he feltsorry for her, but no one could forget that she had compounded her initial error of birth by beingthe governess of Mr. Calverts children. The two Calvert boys, Raiford and Cade, were there withtheir dashing blonde sister, Cathleen, teasing the dark-faced Joe Fontaine and Sally Munroe, hispretty bride-to-be. Alex and Tony Fontaine were whispering in the ears of Dimity Munroe andsending her into gales of giggles. There were families from as far as Lovejoy, ten miles away, andfrom Fayetteville and Jonesboro, a few even from Atlanta and Macon. The house seemed burstingwith the crowd, and a ceaseless babble of talking and laughter and giggles and shrill femininesqueaks and screams rose and fell.

On the porch steps stood John Wilkes, silver-haired, erect, radiating the quiet charm andhospitality that was as warm and never failing as the sun of Georgia summer. Beside him HoneyWilkes, so called because she indiscriminately addressed everyone from her father to the fieldhands by that endearment, fidgeted and giggled as she called greetings to the arriving guests.

Honeys nervously obvious desire to be attractive to every man in sight contrasted sharply withher fathers poise, and Scarlett had the thought that perhaps there was something in what Mrs.

Tarleton said, after all. Certainly the Wilkes men got the family looks. The thick deep-gold lashesthat set off the gray eyes of John Wilkes and Ashley were sparse and colorless in the faces ofHoney and her sister India. Honey had the odd lashless look of a rabbit, and India could bedescribed by no other word than plain.

India was nowhere to be seen, but Scarlett knew she probably was in the kitchen giving finalinstructions to the servants. Poor India, thought Scarlett, shes had so much trouble keeping housesince her mother died that shes never had the chance to catch any beau except Stuart Tarleton, andit certainly wasnt my fault if he thought I was prettier than she.

John Wilkes came down the steps to offer his arm to Scarlett. As she descended from thecarriage, she saw Suellen smirk and knew that she must have picked out Frank Kennedy in thecrowd.

If I couldnt catch a better beau than that old maid in britches! she thought contemptuously, asshe stepped to the ground and smiled her thanks to John Wilkes.

Frank Kennedy was hurrying to the carriage to assist Suellen, and Suellen was bridling in a waythat made Scarlett want to slap her. Frank Kennedy might own more land than anyone in theCounty and he might have a very kind heart, but these things counted for nothing against the factthat he was forty, slight and nervous and had a thin ginger-colored beard and an old-maidish, fussyway about him. However, remembering her plan, Scarlett smothered her contempt and cast such aflashing smile of greeting at him that he stopped short, his arm outheld to Suellen and goggled atScarlett in pleased bewilderment.

Scarletts eyes searched the crowd for Ashley, even while she made pleasant small talk withJohn Wilkes, but he was not on the porch. There were cries of greeting from a dozen voices andStuart and Brent Tarleton moved toward her. The Munroe girls rushed up to exclaim over herdress, and she was speedily the center of a circle of voices that rose higher and higher in efforts tobe heard above the din. But where was Ashley? And Melanie and Charles? She tried not to beobvious as she looked about and peered down the hall into the laughing group inside.

As she chattered and laughed and cast quick glances into the house and the yard, her eyes fell ona stranger, standing alone in the hall, staring at her in a cool impertinent way that brought her upsharply with mingled feeling of feminine pleasure that she had attracted and embarrassed sen(a) sationthatherdresswastoolowinthebosom.Helookedquiteold,(a) atlea(man) st thirty-(an) five. He was a tall man and powerfully built. Scarlett thought she had never seen a man with suchwide shoulders, so heavy with muscles, almost too heavy for gentility. When her eye caught his, hesmiled, showing animal-white teeth below a close-clipped black mustache. He was dark of face,swarthy as a pirate, and his eyes were as bold and black as any pirates appraising a galleon to bescuttled or a maiden to be ravished. There was a cool recklessness in his face and a cynical humor in his mouth as he smiled at her, and Scarlett caught her breath. She felt that she should be insultedby such a look and was annoyed with herself because she did not feel insulted. She did not knowwho he could be, but there was undeniably a look of good blood in his dark face. It showed in thethin hawk nose over the full red lips, the high forehead and the wide-set eyes.

She dragged her eyes away from his without smiling back, and he turned as someone called:

Rhett! Rhett Butler! Come here! I want you to meet the most hard-hearted girl in Georgia.

Rhett Butler? The name had a familiar sound, somehow connected with something pleasantlyscandalous, but her mind was on Ashley and she dismissed the thought.

I must run upstairs and smooth my hair, she told Stuart and Brent, who were trying to get hercornered from the crowd. You boys wait for me and dont run off with any other girl or Ill befurious.

She could see that Stuart was going to be difficult to handle today if she flirted with anyone else.

He had been drinking and wore the arrogant looking-for-a-fight expression that she knew fromexperience meant trouble. She paused in the hall to speak to friends and to greet India who wasemerging from the back of the house, her hair untidy and tiny beads of perspiration on herforehead. Poor India! It would be bad enough to have pale hair and eyelashes and a hitting chinthat meant a stubborn disposition, without being twenty years old and an old maid in the bargain.

She wondered if India resented very much her taking Stuart away from her. Lots of people said shewas still in love with him, but then you could never tell what a Wilkes was thinking about. If shedid resent it, she never gave any sign of it, treating Scarlett with the same slightly aloof, kindlycourtesy she had always shown her.

Scarlett spoke pleasantly to her and started up the wide stairs. As she did, a shy voice behind hercalled her name and, turning, she saw Charles Hamilton. He was a nice-looking boy with a riot ofsoft brown curls on his white forehead and eyes as deep brown, as clean and as gentle as a colliedogs. He was well turned out in mustard-colored trousers and black coat and his pleated shirt wastopped by the widest and most fashionable of black cravats. A faint blush was creeping over hisface as she turned, for he was timid with girls. Like most shy men he greatly admired airy,vivacious, always-at-ease girls like Scarlett. She had never given him more than perfunctorycourtesy before, and so the beaming smile of pleasure with which she greeted him and the twohands outstretched to his almost took his breath away.

Why Charles Hamilton, you handsome old thing, you! Ill bet you came all the way down herefrom Atlanta just to break my poor heart!

Charles almost stuttered with excitement, holding her warm little hands in his and looking intothe dancing green eyes. This was the way girls talked to other boys but never to him. He neverknew why but girls always treated him like a younger brother and were very kind, but neverbothered to tease him. He had always wanted girls to flirt end frolic with him as they did with boysmuch less handsome and less endowed with this worlds goods than he. But on the few occasionswhen this had happened he could never think of anything to say and he suffered agonies ofembarrassment at his dumbness. Then he lay awake at night thinking of all the charminggallantries he might have employed; but he rarely got a second chance, for the girls left him aloneafter a trial or two.

Even with Honey, with whom he had an unspoken understanding of marriage when he came intohis property next fall, he was diffident and silent. At times, he had an ungallant feeling thatHoneys coquetries and proprietary airs were no credit to him, for she was so boy-crazy heimagined she would use them on any man who gave her the opportunity. Charles was not excitedover the prospect of marrying her, for she stirred in him none of the emotions of wild romance thathis beloved books had assured him were proper for a lover. He had always yearned to be loved bysome beautiful, dashing creature full of fire and mischief.

And here was Scarlett OHara teasing him about breaking her heart!

He tried to think of something to say and couldnt, and silently he blessed her because she keptup a steady chatter which relieved him of any necessity for conversation. It was too good to betrue.

Now, you wait right here till I come back, for I want to eat barbecue with you. And dont yougo off philandering with those other girls, because Im mighty jealous, came the incredible wordsfrom red lips with a dimple on each side; and briskly black lashes swept demurely over green eyes.

I wont, he finally managed to breathe, never dreaming that she was thinking he looked like acalf waiting for the butcher.

Tapping him lightly on the arm with her folded fan, she turned to start up the stairs and her eyesagain fell on the man called Rhett Butler who stood alone a few feet away from Charles. Evidentlyhe had overheard the whole conversation, for he grinned up at her as maliciously as a tomcat, andagain his eyes went over her, in a gaze totally devoid of the deference she was accustomed to.

Gods nightgown! said Scarlett to herself in indignation, using Geralds favorite oath. Helooks as ifas if he knew what I looked like without my shimmy, and, tossing her head, she wentup the steps.

In the bedroom where the wraps were laid, she found Cathleen Calvert preening before themirror and biting her lips to make them look redder. There were fresh roses in her sash thatmatched her cheeks, and her cornflower-blue eyes were dancing with excitement.

Cathleen, said Scarlett, trying to pull the corsage of her dress higher, who is that nasty mandownstairs named Butler?

My dear, dont you know? whispered Cathleen excitedly, a weather eye on the next roomwhere Dilcey and the Wilkes girls mammy were gossiping. I cant imagine how Mr. Wilkes mustfeel having him here, but he was visiting Mr. Kennedy in Jonesborosomething about buyingcottonand, of course, Mr. Kennedy had to bring him along with him. He couldnt just go off andleave him.

What is the matter with him?

My dear, he isnt received!

Not really!

No.

Scarlett digested this in silence, for she had never before been under the same roof with anyone who was not received. It was very exciting.

What did he do?

Oh, Scarlett, he has the most terrible reputation. His name is Rhett Butler and hes fromCharleston and his folks are some of the nicest people there, but they wont even speak to him.

Caro Rhett told me about him last summer. He isnt any kin to her family, but she knows all abouthim, everybody does. He was expelled from West Point. Imagine! And for things too bad for Caroto know. And then there was that business about the girl he didnt marry.

Do tell me!

Darling, dont you know anything? Caro told me all about it last summer and her mama woulddie if she thought Caro even knew about it. Well, this Mr. Butler took a Charleston girl out buggyriding. I never did know who she was, but Ive got my suspicions. She couldnt have been verynice or she wouldnt have gone out with him in the late afternoon without a chaperon. And, mydear, they stayed out nearly all night and walked home finally, saying the horse had run away andsmashed the buggy and they had gotten lost in the woods. And guess what

I cant guess. Tell me, said Scarlett enthusiastically, hoping for the worst.

He refused to marry her the next day!

Oh, said Scarlett, her hopes dashed.

He said he hadnterdone anything to her and he didnt see why he should marry her. And,of course, her brother called him out, and Mr. Butler said hed rather be shot than marry a stupidfool. And so they fought a duel and Mr. Butler shot the girls brother and he died, and Mr. Butlerhad to leave Charleston and now nobody receives him, finished Cathleen triumphantly, and just intime, for Dilcey came back into the room to oversee the toilet of her charge.

Did she have a baby? whispered Scarlett in Cathleens ear.

Cathleen shook her head violently. But she was ruined just the same, she hissed back.

I wish I had gotten Ashley to compromise me, thought Scarlett suddenly. Hed be too much of agentleman not to marry me. But somehow, unbidden, she had a feeling of respect for Rhett Butlerfor refusing to marry a girl who was a fool.

Scarlett sat on a high rosewood ottoman, under the shade of a huge oak in the rear of the house,her flounces and ruffles billowing about her and two inches of green morocco slippersall that alady could show and still remain a ladypeeping from beneath them. She had scarcely touchedplate in her hands and seven cavaliers about her. The barbecue had reached its peak and the warmair was full of laughter and talk, the click of silver on porcelain and the rich heavy smells ofroasting meats and redolent gravies. Occasionally when the slight breeze veered, puffs of smokefrom the long barbecue pits floated over the crowd and were greeted with squeals of mock dismayfrom the ladies and violent flappings of palmetto fans.

Most of the young ladies were seated with partners on the long benches that faced the tables, butScarlett, realizing that a girl has only two sides and only one man can sit on each of these sides,had elected to sit apart so she could gather about her as many men as possible.

Under the arbor sat the married women, their dark dresses decorous notes in the surroundingcolor and gaiety. Matrons, regardless of their ages, always grouped together apart from the bright-eyed girls, beaux and laughter, for there were no married belles in the South. From GrandmaFontaine, who was belching frankly with the privilege of her age, to seventeen-year-old AliceMunroe, struggling against the nausea of a first pregnancy, they had their heads together in theendless genealogical and obstetrical discussions that made such gatherings very pleasant andinstructive affairs.

Casting contemptuous glances at them, Scarlett thought that they looked like a clump of fatcrows. Married women never had any fun. It did not occur to her that if she married Ashley shewould automatically be relegated to arbors and front parlors with staid matrons in dull silks, asstaid and dull as they and not a part of the fun and frolicking. Like most girls, her imaginationcarried her just as far as the altar and no further. Besides, she was too unhappy now to pursue anabstraction.

She dropped her eyes to her plate and nibbled daintily on a beaten biscuit with an elegance andan utter lack of appetite that would have won Mammys approval. For all that she had a superfluityof beaux, she had been miserable in her life. In some way that she could not understand,herplansofl(never) astnightha(more) d failed utterly so far as Ashley was concerned. She hadattracted other beaux by the dozens, but not Ashley, and all the fears of yesterday afternoon weresweeping back upon her, making her heart beat fast and then slow, and color flame and whiten inher cheeks.

Ashley had made no attempt to join the circle about her, in fact she had not had a word alonewith him since arriving, or even spoken to him since their first greeting. He had come forward towelcome her when she came into the back garden, but Melanie had been on his arm then, Melaniewho hardly came up to his shoulder.

She was a tiny, frailly built girl, who gave the appearance of a child masquerading in hermothers enormous hoop skirtsan illusion that was heightened by the shy, almost frightened lookin her too large brown eyes. She had a cloud of curly dark hair which was so sternly repressedbeneath its net that no vagrant tendrils escaped, and this dark mass, with its long widows peak,accentuated the heart shape of her face. Too wide across the cheek bones, too pointed at the chin, itwas a sweet, timid face but a plain face, and she had no feminine tricks of allure to make observersforget its plainness. She lookedand wasas simple as earth, as good as bread, as transparent asspring water. But for all her plainness of feature and smallness of stature, there was a sedate dignityabout her movements that was oddly touching and far older than her seventeen years.

Her gray organdie dress, with its cherry-colored satin sash, disguised with its billows and ruffleshow childishly undeveloped her body was, and the yellow hat with long cherry streamers made hercreamy skin glow. Her heavy earbobs with their long gold fringe hung down from loops of tidilynetted hair, swinging close to her brown eyes, eyes that had the still gleam of a forest pool inwinter when brown leaves shine up through quiet water.

She had smiled with timid liking when she greeted Scarlett and told her how pretty her greendress was, and Scarlett had been hard put to be even civil in reply, so violently did she want to speak alone with Ashley. Since then, Ashley had sat on a stool at Melanies feet, apart from theother guests, and talked quietly with her, smiling the slow drowsy smile that Scarlett loved. Whatmade matters worse was that under his smile a little sparkle had come into Melanies eyes, so thateven Scarlett had to admit that she looked almost pretty. As Melanie looked at Ashley, her plainface lit up as with an inner fire, for if ever a loving heart showed itself upon a face, it was showingnow on Melanie Hamiltons.

Scarlett tried to keep her eyes from these two but could not, and after each glance she redoubledher gaiety with her cavaliers, laughing, saying daring things, teasing, tossing her head at theircompliments until her earrings danced. She said fiddle-dee-dee many times, declared that thetruth wasnt in any of them, and vowed that shed never believe anything any man told her. ButAshley did not seem to notice her at all. He only looked up at Melanie and talked on, and Melanielooked down at him with an expression that radiated the fact that she belonged to him.

So, Scarlett was miserable.

To the outward eye, never had a girl less cause to he miserable. She was undoubtedly the belleof the barbecue, the center of attention. The furore she was causing among the men, coupled withthe heart burnings of the other girls, would have pleased her enormously at any other time.

Charles Hamilton, emboldened by her notice, was firmly planted on her right, refusing to bedislodged by the combined efforts of the Tarteton twins. He held her fan in one hand and hisuntouched plate of barbecue in the other and stubbornly refused to meet the eyes of Honey, whoseemed on the verge of an outburst of tears. Cade lounged gracefully on her left, plucking at herskirt to attract her attention and staring up with smoldering eyes at Stuart Already the air waselectric between him and the twins and rude words had passed. Frank Kennedy fussed about like ahen with one chick, running back and forth from the shade of the oak to the tables to fetch daintiesto tempt Scarlett, as if there were not a dozen servants there for that purpose. As a result, Suellenssullen resentment had passed beyond the point of ladylike concealment and she glowered atScarlett Small Carreen could have cried because, for all Scarletts encouraging words that morning,Brent had done no more than say Hello, Sis and jerk her hair ribbon before turning his fullattention to Scarlett. Usually he was so kind and treated her with a careless deference that madeher feel grown up, and Carreen secretly dreamed of the day when she would put her hair up andher skirts down and receive him as a real beau. And now it seemed that Scarlett had him. TheMunroe girls were concealing their chagrin at the defection of the swarthy Fontaine boys, but theywere annoyed at the way Tony and Alex stood about the circle, jockeying for a position nearScarlett should any of the others arise from their places.

They telegraphed their disapproval of Scarletts conduct to Hetty Tarleton by delicately raisedeyebrows. Fast was the only word for Scarlett. Simultaneously, the three young ladies raised lacyparasols, said they had had quite enough to eat thank you, and, laying light fingers on the arms ofthe men nearest them, clamored sweetly to see the rose garden, the spring and the summerhouse.

This strategic retreat in good order was not lost on a woman present or observed by a man.

Scarlett giggled as she saw three men dragged out of the line of her charms to investigatelandmarks familiar to the girls from childhood, and cut her eye sharply to see if Ashley had takennote. But he was playing with the ends of Melanies sash and smiling up at her. Pain twisted Scarletts heart. She felt that she could claw Melanies ivory skin till the blood ran and takepleasure in doing it.

As her eyes wandered from Melanie, she caught the gaze of Rhett Butler, who was not mixingwith the crowd but standing apart talking to John Wilkes. He had been watching her and when shelooked at him he laughed outright. Scarlett had an uneasy feeling that this man who was notreceived was the only one present who knew what lay behind her wild gaiety and that it wasaffording him sardonic amusement. She could have clawed him with pleasure too.

If I can just live through this barbecue till this afternoon, she thought, all the girls will goupstairs to take naps to be fresh for tonight and Ill stay downstairs and get to talk to Ashley.

Surely he must have noticed how popular I am. She soothed her heart with another hope: Ofcourse, he has to be attentive to Melanie because, after all, she is his cousin and she isnt popular atall, and if he didnt look out for her shed just be a wallflower.

She took new courage at this thought and redoubled her efforts in the direction of Charles,whose brown eyes glowed down eagerly at her. It was a wonderful day for Charles, a dream day,and he had fallen in love with Scarlett with no effort at all. Before this new emotion, Honeyreceded into a dim haze. Honey was a shrill-voiced sparrow and Scarlett a gleaming hummingbird.

She teased him and favored him and asked him questions and answered them herself, so that heappeared very clever without having to say a word. The other boys were puzzled and annoyed byher obvious interest in him, for they knew Charles was too shy to hitch two consecutive words together,and politeness was being severely strained to conceal their growing rage. Everyone wassmoldering, and it would have been a positive triumph for Scarlett, except for Ashley.

When the last forkful of pork and chicken and mutton had been eaten, Scarlett hoped the timehad come when India would rise and suggest that the ladies retire to the house. It was two oclockand the sun was warm overhead, but India, wearied with the three-day preparations for thebarbecue, was only too glad to remain sitting beneath the arbor, shouting remarks to a deaf oldgentleman from Fayetteville.

A lazy somnolence descended on the crowd. The negroes idled about, clearing the long tables onwhich the food had been laid. The laughter and talking became less animated and groups here andthere fell silent. All were waiting for their hostess to signal the end of the mornings festivities.

Palmetto fans were wagging more slowly, and several gentlemen were nodding from the heat andoverloaded stomachs. The barbecue was over and all were content to take their ease while sun wasat its height.

In this interval between the morning party and the evenings ball, they seemed a placid, peacefullot. Only the young men retained the restless energy which had filled the whole throng a shortwhile before. Moving from group to group, drawling in their soft voices, they were as handsome asblooded stallions and as dangerous. The languor of midday had taken hold of the gathering, but underneathlurked tempers that could rise to killing heights in a second and flare out as quickly. Menand women, they were beautiful and wild, all a little violent under their pleasant ways and only alittle tamed.

Some time dragged by while the sun grew hotter, and Scarlett and others looked again towardIndia. Conversation was dying out when, in the lull, everyone in the grove heard Geralds voice raised in furious accents. Standing some little distance away from the barbecue tables, he was atthe peak of an argument with John Wilkes.

Gods nightgown, man! Pray for a peaceable settlement with the Yankees. After weve fired onthe rascals at Fort Sumter? Peaceable? The South should show by arms that she cannot be insultedand that she is not leaving the Union by the Unions kindness but by her own strength!

Oh, my God! thought Scarlett. Hes done it! Now, well all sit here till midnight.

In an instant, the somnolence had fled from the lounging throng and something electric wentsnapping through the air. The men sprang from benches and chain, arms in wide gestures, voicesclashing for the right to be heard above other voices. There had been no talk of politics orimpending war all during the morning, because of Mr. Wilkes request that the ladies should not bebored. But now Gerald had bawled the words Fort Sumter, and every man present forgot hishosts admonition.

Of course well fight Yankee thieves We could lick them in a month Why, oneSoutherner can lick twenty Yankees Teach them lesson they wont soon forget

Peaceably? They wont let goinpeaceNo,l(a) ook how Mr. Lincoln insulted our Commissioners!Yes,keptthe(us) m hanging around for weeksswearing hed have Sumterevacuated! They want war; well make them sick of war And above all the voices, Geraldsboomed. All Scarlett could hear was States rights, by God! shouted over and over. Gerald washaving an excellent time, but not his daughter.

Secession, warthese words long since had become acutely boring to Scarlett from muchrepetition, but now she hated the sound of them, for they meant that the men would stand there forhours haranguing one another and she would have no chance to corner Ashley. Of course therewould be no war and the men all knew it. They just loved to talk and hear themselves talk.

Charles Hamilton had not risen with the others and, finding himself comparatively alone withScarlett, he leaned closer and, with the daring born of new love, whispered a confession.

Miss OHaraII had already decided that if we did fight, Id go over to South Carolina andjoin a troop there. Its said that Mr. Wade Hampton is organizing a cavalry troop, and of course Iwould want to go with him. Hes a splendid person and was my fathers best friend.

Scarlett thought, What am I supposed to dogive three cheers? for Charles expressionshowed that he was baring his hearts secrets to her. She could think of nothing to say and somerely looked at him, wondering why men were such fools as to think women interested in suchmatters. He took her expression to mean stunned approbation and went on rapidly, daringlyIf I wentwouldwould you be sorry, Miss OHara?

I should cry into my pillow every night, said Scarlett, meaning to be flippant, but he took thestatement at face value and went red with pleasure. Her hand was concealed in the folds of herdress and he cautiously wormed his hand to it and squeezed it, overwhelmed at his own boldnessand at her acquiescence.

Would you pray for me?

What a fool! thought Scarlett bitterly, casting a surreptitious glance about her in the hope of being rescued from the conversation.

Would you?

Ohyes, indeed, Mr. Hamilton. Three Rosaries a night, at least!

Charles gave a swift look about him, drew in his breath, stiffened the muscles of his stomach.

They were practically alone and he might never get another such opportunity. And, even givenanother such Godsent occasion, his courage might fail him.

Miss OHaraI must tell you something. II love you!

Um? said Scarlett absently, trying to peer through the crowd of arguing men to where Ashleystill sat talking at Melanies feet.

Yes! whispered Charles, in a rapture that she had neither laughed, screamed nor fainted, as hehad always imagined young girls did under such circumstances. I love you! You are the mostthe most and he found his tongue for the first time in his life. The most beautiful girl Ive everknown and the sweetest and the kindest, and you have the dearest ways and I love you with all myheart. I cannot hope that you could love anyone like me but, my dear Miss OHara, if you can giveme any encouragement, I will do anything in the world to make you love me. I will

Charles stopped, for he couldnt think of anything difficult enough of accomplishment to reallyprove to Scarlett the depth of his feeling, so he said simply: I want to marry you.

Scarlett came back to earth with a jerk, at the sound of the word marry. She had been thinkingof marriage and of Ashley, and she looked at Charles with poorly concealed irritation. Why mustthis calf-like fool intrude his feelings on this particular day when she was so worried she was aboutto lose her mind? She looked into the pleading brown eyes and she saw none of the beauty of a shyboys first love, of the adoration of an ideal come true or the wild happiness and tenderness thatwere sweeping through him like a flame. Scarlett was used to men asking her to marry them, menmuch more attractive than Charles Hamilton, and men who had more finesse than to propose at abarbecue when she had more important matters on her mind. She only saw a boy of twenty, red asa beet and looking very silly. She wished that she could tell him how silly he looked. Butautomatically, the words Ellen had taught her to say in such emergencies rose to her lips andcasting down her eyes, from force of long habit, she murmured: Mr. Hamilton, I am not unawareof the honor you have bestowed on me in wanting me to become your wife, but this is all sosudden that I do not know what to say.

That was a neat way of smoothing a mans vanity and yet keeping him on the string, and Charlesrose to it as though such bait were new and he the first to swallow it.

I would wait forever! I wouldnt want you unless you were quite sure. Please, Miss OHara, tellme that I may hope!

Um, said Scarlett, her sharp eyes noting that Ashley, who had not risen to take part in the wartalk, was smiling up at Melanie. If this fool who was grappling for her hand would only keep quietfor a moment, perhaps she could hear what they were saying. She must hear what they said. Whatdid Melanie say to him that brought that look of interest to his eyes?

Charles words blurred the voices she strained to hear.

Oh, hush! she hissed at him, pinching his hand and not even looking at him.

Startled, at first abashed, Charles blushed at the rebuff and then, seeing how her eyes werefastened on his sister, he smiled. Scarlett was afraid someone might hear his words. She wasnaturally embarrassed and shy, and in agony lest they be overheard. Charles felt a surge of masculinitysuch as he had never experienced, for this was the first time in his life that he had everembarrassed any girl. The thrill was intoxicating. He arranged his face in what he fancied was anexpression of careless unconcern and cautiously returned Scarletts pinch to show that he was manof the world enough to understand and accept her reproof.

She did not even feel his pinch, for she could hear clearly the sweet voice that was Melanieschief charm: I fear I cannot agree with you about Mr. Thackerays works. He is a cynic. I fear beis not the gentleman Mr. Dickens is.

What a silly thing to say to a man, thought Scarlett, ready to giggle with relief. Why, shes nomore than a bluestocking and everyone knows what men think of bluestockings. ... The way to geta man interested and to hold his interest was to talk about him, and then gradually lead theconversation around to yourselfand keep it there. Scarlett would have felt some cause for alarmif Melanie had been saying: How wonderful you are! or How do you ever think of such things?

My little ole brain would bust if I even tried to think about them! But here she was, with a man ather feet, talking as seriously as if she were in church. The prospect looked brighter to Scarlett, sobright in fact that she turned beaming eyes on Charles and smiled from pure joy. Enraptured at thisevidence of her affection, he grabbed up her fan and plied it so enthusiastically her hair began toblow about untidily.

Ashley, you have not favored us with your opinion, said Jim Tarleton, turning from the groupof shouting men, and with an apology Ashley excused himself and rose. There was no one there sohandsome, thought Scarlett, as she marked how graceful was his negligent pose and how the sungleamed on his gold hair and mustache. Even the older men stopped to listen to his words.

Why, gentlemen, if Georgia fights. Ill go with her. Why else would I have joined the Troop?

he said. His gray eyes opened wide and their drowsiness disappeared in an intensity that Scarletthad never seen before. But, like Father, I hope the Yankees will let us go in peace and that therewill be no fighting He held up his hand with a smile, as a babel of voices from the Fontaine andTarleton boys began, Yes, yes, I know weve been insulted and lied tobut if wed been in theYankees shoes and they were trying to leave the Union, how would we have acted? Pretty muchthe same. We wouldnt have liked it.

There he goes again, thought Scarlett. Always putting himself in the other fellows shoes.

To her, there was never but one fair side to an argument. Sometimes, there was no understandingAshley.

Lets dont be too hot headed and lets dont have any war. Most of the misery of the world hasbeen caused by wars. And when the wars were over, no one ever knew what they were all about.

Scarlett sniffed. Lucky for Ashley that he had an unassailable reputation for courage, or elsethered be trouble. As she thought this, the clamor of dissenting voices rose up about Ashley,indignant, fiery.

Under the arbor, the deaf old gentleman from Fayetteville punched India.

Whats it all about? What are they saying?

War! shouted India, cupping her hand to his ear. They want to fight the Yankees!

War, is it? he cried, fumbling about him for his cane and heaving himself out of his chair withmore energy than he had shown in years. Ill tell um about war. Ive been there. It was not oftenthat Mr. McRae had the opportunity to talk about war, the way his women folks shushed him.

He stumped rapidly to the group, waving his cane and shouting and, because he could not hearthe voices about him, he soon had undisputed possession of the field.

You fire-eating young bucks, listen to me. You dont want to fight. I fought and I know. Wentout in the Seminole War and was a big enough fool to go to the Mexican War, too. You all dontknow what war is. You think its riding a pretty horse and having the girls throw flowers at you andcoming home a hero. Well, it aint. No, sir! Its going hungry, and getting the measles andpneumonia from sleeping in the wet. And if it aint measles and pneumonia, if s your bowels. Yessir, what war does to a mans bowelsdysentery and things like that

The ladies were pink with blushes. Mr. McRae was a reminder of a cruder era, like GrandmaFontaine and her embarrassingly loud belches, an era everyone would like to forget.

Run get your grandpa, hissed one of the old gentlemans daughters to a young girl standingnear by. I declare, she whispered to the fluttering matrons about her, he gets worse every day.

Would you believe it, this very morning he said to Maryand shes only sixteen: Now, Missy ...

And the voice went off into a whisper as the granddaughter slipped out to try to induce Mr.

McRae to return to his seat in the shade.

Of all the group that milled about under the trees, girls smiling excitedly, men talkingimpassionedly, there was only one who seemed calm. Scarletts eyes turned to Rhett Butler, wholeaned against a tree, his hands shoved deep in his trouser pockets. He stood alone, since Mr.

Wilkes had left his side, and had uttered no word as the conversation grew hotter. The red lipsunder the close-clipped black mustache curled down and there was a glint of amused contempt inhis black eyescontempt, as if he listened to the braggings of children. A very disagreeable smile,Scarlett thought. He listened quietly until Stuart Tarleton, his red hair tousled and his eyesgleaming, repeated: Why, we could lick them in a month! Gentlemen always fight better thanrabble. A monthwhy, one battle

Gentlemen, said Rhett Butler, in a flat drawl that bespoke his Charleston birth, not movingfrom his position against the tree or taking his hands from his pockets, may I say a word?

There was contempt in his manner as in his eyes, contempt overlaid with an air of courtesy thatsomehow burlesqued their own manners.

The group turned toward him and accorded him the politeness always due an outsider.

Has any one of you gentlemen ever thought that theres not a cannon factory south of theMason-Dixon Line? Or how few iron foundries there are in the South? Or woolen mills or cottonfactories or tanneries? Have you thought that we would not have a single warship and that theYankee fleet could bottle up our harbors in a week, so that we could not sell our cotton abroad?

Butof courseyou gentlemen have thought of these things.

Why, he means the boys are a passel of fools! thought Scarlett indignantly, the hot bloodcoming to her cheeks.

Evidently, she was not the only one to whom this idea occurred, for several of the boys werebeginning to stick out their chins. John Wilkes casually but swiftly came back to his place besidethe speaker, as if to impress on all present that this man was his guest and that, moreover, therewere ladies present.

The trouble with most of us Southerners, continued Rhett Butler, is that we either dont travelenough or we dont profit enough by our travels. Now, of course, all you gentlemen are welltraveled. But what have you seen? Europe and New York and Philadelphia and, of course, theladies have been to Saratoga (he bowed slightly to the group under the arbor). Youve seen thehotels and the museums and the balls and the gambling houses. And youve come home believingthat theres no place like the South. As for me, I was Charleston born, but I have spent the last fewyears in the North. His white teeth showed in a grin, as though he realized that everyone presentknew just why he no longer lived in Charleston, and cared not at all if they did know. I have seenmany things that you all have not seen. The thousands of immigrants whod be glad to fight for theYankees for food and a few dollars, the factories, the foundries, the shipyards, the iron and coalminesall the things we havent got. Why, all we have is cotton and slaves and arrogance. Theydlick us in a month.

For a tense moment, there was silence. Rhett Butler removed a fine linen handkerchief from hiscoat pocket and idly flicked dust from his sleeve. Then an ominous murmuring arose in the crowdand from under the arbor came a humming as unmistakable as that of a hive of newly disturbedbees. Even while she felt the hot blood of wrath still in her cheeks, something in Scarletts practicalmind prompted the thought that what this man said was right, and it sounded like common sense.

Why, shed never even seen a factory, or known anyone who had seen a factory. But, even if itwere true, he was no gentleman to make such a statementand at a party, too, where everyonewas having a good time.

Stuart Tarleton, brows lowering, came forward with Brent close at his heels. Of course, theTarleton twins had nice manners and they wouldnt make a scene at a barbecue, even thoughtremendously provoked. Just the same, all the ladies felt pleasantly excited, for it was so seldomthat they actually saw a scene or a quarrel. Usually they had to hear of it third-hand.

Sir, said Stuart heavily, what do you mean?

Rhett looked at him with polite but mocking eyes.

I mean, he answered, what Napoleonperhaps youve heard of him?remarked once, Godis on the side of the strongest battalion!  and, turning to John Wilkes, he said with courtesy thatwas unfeigned: You promised to show me your library, sir. Would it be too great a favor to ask tosee it now? I fear I must go back to Jonesboro early this afternoon where a bit of business callsme.

He swung about, facing the crowd, clicked his heels together and bowed like a dancing master, abow that was graceful for so powerful a man, and as full of impertinence as a slap in the face. Then he walked across the lawn with John Wilkes, his black head in the air, and the sound of hisdiscomforting laughter floated back to the group about the tables.

There was a startled silence and then the buzzing broke out again. India rose tiredly from herseat beneath the arbor and went toward the angry Stuart Tarleton. Scarlett could not hear what shesaid, but the look in her eyes as she gazed up into his lowering face gave Scarlett something like atwinge of conscience. It was the same look of belonging that Melanie wore when she looked atAshley, only Stuart did not see it. So India did love him. Scarlett thought for an instant that if shehad not flirted so blatantly with Stuart at that political speaking a year ago, he might have marriedIndia long ere this. But then the twinge passed with the comforting thought that it wasnt her faultif other girls couldnt keep their men.

Finally Stuart smiled down at India, an unwilling smile, and nodded his head. Probably Indiahad been pleading with him not to follow Mr. Butler and make trouble. A polite tumult broke outunder the trees as the guests arose, shaking crumbs from laps. The married women called to nursesand small children and gathered their broods together to take their departure, and groups of girlsstarted off, laughing and talking, toward the house to exchange gossip in the upstairs bedrooms andto take their naps.

All the ladies except Mrs. Tarleton moved out of the back yard, leaving the shade of oaks andarbor to the men. She was detained by Gerald, Mr. Calvert and the others who wanted an answerfrom her about the horses for the Troop.

Ashley strolled over to where Scarlett and Charles sat, a thoughtful and amused smile on hisface.

Arrogant devil, isnt he? he observed, looking after Butler. He looks like one of the Borgias.

Scarlett thought quickly but could remember no family in the County or Atlanta or Savannah bythat name.

I dont know them. Is he kin to them? Who are they?

An odd look over Charles face, incredulity and shame struggling with love. Love triumphedasherealize(came) d that it was enough for a girl to be sweet and gentle and beautiful, withouthaving an education to hamper her charms, and he made swift answer: The Borgias wereItalians.

Oh, said Scarlett, losing interest, foreigners.

She turned her prettiest smile on Ashley, but for some reason he was not looking at her. He waslooking at Charles, and there was understanding in his face and a little pity.

Scarlett stood on the landing and peered cautiously over the banisters into the hall below. It wasempty. From the bedrooms on the floor above came an unending hum of low voices, rising andfalling, punctuated with squeaks of laughter and, Now, you didnt, really! and What did he saythen? On the beds and couches of the six great bedrooms, the girls were resting, their dresses off,their stays loosed, their hair flowing down their backs. Afternoon naps were a custom of thecountry and never were they so necessary as on the all-day parties, beginning early in the morning and culminating in a ball. For half an hour, the girls would chatter and laugh, and then servantswould pull the shutters and in the warm half-gloom the talk would die to whispers and finallyexpire in silence broken only by soft regular breathing.

Scarlett had made certain that Melanie was lying down on the bed with Honey and HettyTarleton before she slipped into the hall and started down the stairs. From the window on thelanding, she could see the group of men sitting under the arbor, drinking from tall glasses, and sheknew they would remain there until late afternoon. Her eyes searched the group but Ashley was notamong them. Then she listened and she heard his voice. As she had hoped, he was still in the frontdriveway bidding good-by to departing matrons and children.

Her heart in her throat, she went swiftly down the stairs. What if she should meet Mr. Wilkes?

What excuse could she give for prowling about the house when all the other girls were getting theirbeauty naps? Well, that had to be risked.

As she reached the bottom step, she heard the servants moving about in the dining room underthe butlers orders, lifting out the table and chairs in preparation for the dancing. Across the widehall was the open door of the library and she sped into it noiselessly. She could wait there untilAshley finished his adieux and then call to him when he came into the house.

The library was in semidarkness, for the blinds had been drawn against the sun. The dim roomwith towering walls completely filled with dark books depressed her. It was not the place whichshe would have chosen for a tryst such as she hoped this one would be. Large numbers of booksalways depressed her, as did people who liked to read large numbers of books. That isall peopleexcept Ashley. The heavy furniture rose up at her in the half-light, high-backed chairs with deepseats and wide arms, made for the tall Wilkes men, squatty soft chairs of velvet with velvethassocks before them for the girls. Far across the long room before the hearth, the seven-foot sofa,Ashleys favorite seat, reared its high back, like some huge sleeping animal.

She closed the door except for a crack and tried to make her heart beat more slowly. She tried toremember just exactly what she had planned last night to say to Ashley, but she couldnt recallanything. Had she thought up something and forgotten itor had she only planned that Ashleyshould say something to her? She couldnt remember, and a sudden cold fright fell upon her. If herheart would only stop pounding in her ears, perhaps she could think of what to say. But the quickthudding only increased as she heard him call a final farewell and walk into the front hall.

All she could think of was that she loved himeverything about him, from the proud lift of hisgold head to his slender dark boots, loved his laughter even when it mystified her, loved hisbewildering silences. Oh, if only he would walk in on her now and take her in his arms, so shewould be spared the need of saying anything. He must love herPerhaps if I prayed Shesqueezed her eyes tightly and began gabbling to herself Hail Mary, full of grace

Why, Scarlett! said Ashleys voice, breaking in through the roaring in her ears and throwingher into utter confusion. He stood in the hall peering at her through the partly opened door, aquizzical smile on his face.

Who are you hiding fromCharles or the Tarletons?

She gulped. So he had noticed how the men had swarmed about her! How unutterably dear he was standing there with his eyes twinkling, all unaware of her excitement. She could not speak, butshe put out a hand and drew him into the room. He entered, puzzled but interested. There was atenseness about her, a glow in her eyes that he had never seen before, and even in the dim light hecould see the rosy flush on her cheeks. Automatically be closed the door behind him and took herhand.

What is it? he said, almost in a whisper.

At the touch of his hand, she began to tremble. It was going to happen now, just as she haddreamed it. A thousand incoherent thoughts shot through her mind, and she could not catch a singleone to mold into a word. She could only shake and look up into his face. Why didnt he speak?

What is it? he repeated. A secret to tell me?

Suddenly she found her tongue and just as suddenly all the years of Ellens teachings fell away,and the forthright Irish blood of Gerald spoke from his daughters lips.

Yesa secret I love you.

For an instance there was a silence so acute it seemed that neither of them even breathed. Thenthe trembling fell away from her, as happiness and pride surged through her. Why hadnt she donethis before? How much simpler than all the ladylike maneuverings she had been taught. And thenher eyes sought his.

There was a look of consternation in them, of incredulity and something morewhat was it?

Yes, Gerald had looked that way the day his pet hunter had broken his leg and he had had to shoothim. Why did she have to think of that now? Such a silly thought. And why did Ashley look sooddly and say nothing? Then something like a well-trained mask came down over his face and hesmiled gallantly.

Isnt it enough that youve collected every other mans heart here today? he said, with the old,teasing, caressing note in his voice. Do you want to make it unanimous? Well, youve always hadmy heart, you know. You cut your teeth on it.

Something was wrongall wrong! This was not the way she had planned it. Through the madtearing of ideas round and round in her brain, one was beginning to take form. Somehowforsome reasonAshley was acting as if he thought she was just flirting with him. But he knewdifferently. She knew he did.

AshleyAshleytell meyou mustoh, dont tease me now! Have I your heart? Oh, mydear, I lo

His hand went across her lips, swiftly. The mask was gone.

You must not say these things, Scarlett! You mustnt. You dont mean them. Youll hateyourself for saying them, and youll hate me for hearing them!

She jerked her head away. A hot swift current was running through her.

I couldnt ever hate you. I tell you I love you and I know you must care about me because

She stopped. Never before had she seen so much misery in anyones face. Ashley, do you careyou do, dont you?

Yes, he said dully. I care.

If he had said he loathed her, she could not have been more frightened. She plucked at hissleeve, speechless.

Scarlett, he said, cant we go away and forget that we have ever said these things?

No, she whispered. I cant. What do you mean? Dont you want toto marry me?

He replied, Im going to marry Melanie.

Somehow she found that she was sitting on the low velvet chair and Ashley, on the hassock ather feet, was holding both her hands in his, in a hard grip. He was saying thingsthings that madeno sense. Her mind was quite blank, quite empty of all the thoughts that had surged through it onlya moment before, and his words made no more impression than rain on glass. They fell onunhearing ears, words that were swift and tender and full of pity, like a father speaking to a hurtchild.

The sound of Melanies name caught in her consciousness and she looked into his crystal-grayeyes. She saw in them the old remoteness that had always baffled herand a look of self-hatred.

Father is to announce the engagement tonight. We are to be married soon. I should have toldyou, but I thought you knew. I thought everyone knewhad known for years. I never dreamed thatyou Youve so many beaux. I thought Stuart

Life and feeling and comprehension were beginning to flow back into her.

But you just said you cared for me.

His warm hands hurt hers.

My dear, must you make me say things that will hurt you?

Her silence pressed him on.

How can I make you see these things, my dear. You who are so young and unthinking that youdo not know what marriage means.

I know I love you.

Love isnt enough to make a successful marriage when two people are as different as we are.

You would want all of a man, Scarlett, his body, his heart, his soul, his thoughts. And if you did nothave them, you would be miserable. And I couldnt give you all of me. I couldnt give all of me toanyone. And I would not want an of your mind and your soul. And you would be hurt, and thenyou would come to hate mehow bitterly! You would hate the books I read and the music I loved,because they took me away from you even for a moment And Iperhaps I

Do you love her?

She is like me, part of my blood, and we understand each other. Scarlett! Scarlett! Cant I makeyou see that a marriage cant go on in any sort of peace unless the two people are alike?

Some one else had said that: Like must marry like or therell be no happiness. Who was it? Itseemed a million years since she had heard that, but it still did not make sense.

But you said you cared.

I shouldnt have said it.

Somewhere in her brain, a slow fire rose and rage began to blot out everything else.

Well, having been cad enough to say it

His face went white.

I was a cad to say it, as Im going to marry Melanie. I did you a wrong and Melanie a greaterone. I should not have said it, for I knew you wouldnt understand. How could I help caring foryouyou who have all the passion for life that I have not? You who can love and hate with aviolence impossible to me? Why you are as elemental as fire and wind and wild things and I

She thought of Melanie and saw suddenly her quiet brown eyes with their far-off look, herplacid little hands in their black lace mitts, her gentle silences. And then her rage broke, the samerage that drove Gerald to murder and other Irish ancestors to misdeeds that cost them their necks.

There was nothing in her now of the well-bred Robillards who could bear with white silenceanything the world might cast.

Why dont you say it, you coward! Youre afraid to marry me! Youd rather live with thatstupid little fool who cant open her mouth except to say Yes or No and raise a passel of mealy-mouthed brats just like her! Why

You must not say these things about Melanie!

I mustnt be damned to you! Who are you to tell me I mustnt? You coward, you cad, youYou made me believe you were going to marry me

Be fair, his voice pleaded. Did I ever

She did not want to be fair, although she knew what he said was true. He had never once crossedthe borders of friendliness with her and, when she thought of this fresh anger rose, the anger ofhurt pride and feminine vanity. She had run after him and he would have none of her. He preferreda whey-faced little fool like Melanie to her. Oh, far better that she had followed Ellen andMammys precepts and never, never revealed that she even liked him&

Chapter 7

WITHIN TWO WEEKS Scarlett had become a wife, and within two months more she was awidow. She was soon released from the bonds she had assumed with so much haste and so littlethought, but she was never again to know the careless freedom of her unmarried days. Widowhoodhad crowded closely on the heels of marriage but, to her dismay, motherhood soon followed.

In after years when she thought of those last days of April, 1861, Scarlett could never quiteremember details. Time and events were telescoped, jumbled together like a nightmare that had noreality or reason. Till the day she died there would be blank spots in her memories of those days.

Especially vague were her recollections of the time between her acceptance of Charles and herwedding. Two weeks! So short an engagement would have been impossible in times of peace.

Then there would have been a decorous interval of a year or at least six months. But the South wasaflame with war, events roared along as swiftly as if carried by a mighty wind and the slow tempoof the old days was gone. Ellen had wrung her hands and counseled delay, in order that Scarlettmight think the matter over at greater length. But to her pleadings, Scarlett turned a sullen face and a deaf ear. Marry she would! and quickly too. Within two weeks.

Learning that Ashleys wedding had been moved up from the autumn to the first of May, so hecould leave with the Troop as soon as it was called into service, Scarlett set the date of herwedding for the day before his. Ellen protested but Charles pleaded with new-found eloquence, forhe was impatient to be off to South Carolina to join Wade Hamptons Legion, and Gerald sidedwith the two young people. He was excited by the war fever and pleased that Scarlett had made sogood a match, and who was he to stand in the way of young love when there was a war? Ellen,distracted, finally gave in as other mothers throughout the South were doing. Their leisured worldhad been turned topsy-turvy, and their pleadings, prayers and advice availed nothing against thepowerful forces sweeping them along.

The South was intoxicated with enthusiasm and excitement. Everyone knew that one battlewould end the war and every young man hastened to enlist before the war should endhastened tomarry his sweetheart before he rushed off to Virginia to strike a blow at the Yankees. There weredozens of war weddings in the County and there was little time for the sorrow of parting, foreveryone was too busy and excited for either solemn thoughts or tears. The ladies were makinguniforms, knitting socks and rolling bandages, and the men were drilling and shooting. Train loadsof troops passed through Jonesboro daily on their way north to Atlanta and Virginia, Some detachmentswere gaily uniformed in the scarlets and light blues and greens of select social-militiacompanies; some small groups were in homespun and coonskin caps; others, ununiformed, were inbroadcloth and fine linen; all were half-drilled, half-armed, wild with excitement and shouting asthough en route to a picnic. The sight of these men threw the County boys into a panic for fear thewar would be over before they could reach Virginia, and preparations for the Troops departurewere speeded.

In the midst of this turmoil, preparations went forward for Scarletts wedding and, almost beforeshe knew it, she was clad in Ellens wedding dress and veil, coming down the wide stairs of Taraon her fathers arm, to face a house packed full with guests. Afterward she remembered, as from adream, the hundreds of candles flaring on the walls, her mothers face, loving, a little bewildered,her lips moving in a silent prayer for her daughters happiness, Gerald flushed with brandy andpride that his daughter was marrying both money, a fine name and an old oneand Ashley,standing at the bottom of the steps with Melanies arm through his.

When she saw the look on his face, she thought: This cant be real. It cant be. Its a nightmare.

Ill wake up and find its all been a nightmare. I mustnt think of it now, or Ill begin screaming infront of all these people. I cant think now. Ill think later, when I can stand itwhen I cant seehis eyes.

It was all very dreamlike, the passage through the aisle of smiling people, Charles scarlet faceand stammering voice and her own replies, so startlingly clear, so cold, And the congratulationsafterward and the kissing and the toasts and the dancingall, all like a dream. Even the feel ofAshleys kiss upon her cheek, even Melanies soft whisper, Now, were really and truly sisters,

were unreal. Even the excitement caused by the swooning spell that overtook Charles plumpemotional aunt, Miss Pittypat Hamilton, had the quality of a nightmare.

But when the dancing and toasting were finally ended and the dawn was coming, when all the Atlanta guests who could be crowded into Tara and the overseers house had gone to sleep on beds,sofas and pallets on the floor and all the neighbors had gone home to rest in preparation for thewedding at Twelve Oaks the next day, then the dreamlike trance shattered like crystal beforereality. The reality was the blushing Charles, emerging from her dressing room in his nightshirt,avoiding the startled look she gave him over the high-pulled sheet.

Of course, she knew that married people occupied the same bed but she had never given thematter a thought before. It seemed very natural in the case of her mother and father, but she hadnever applied it to herself. Now for the first time since the barbecue she realized just what she hadbrought on herself. The thought of this strange boy whom she hadnt really wanted to marrygetting into bed with her, when her heart was breaking with an agony of regret at her hasty actionand the anguish of losing Ashley forever, was too much to be borne. As he hesitatingly approachedthe bed she spoke in a hoarse whisper.

Ill scream out loud if you come near me. I will! I willat the top of my voice! Get away fromme! Dont you dare touch me!

So Charles Hamilton spent his wedding night in an armchair in the corner, not too unhappily, forhe understood, or thought he understood, the modesty and delicacy of his bride. He was willing towait until her fears subsided, onlyonly He sighed as he twisted about seeking a comfortableposition, for he was going away to the war so very soon.

Nightmarish as her own wedding had been, Ashleys wedding was even worse. Scarlett stood inher apple-green second-day dress in the parlor of Twelve Oaks amid the blaze of hundreds ofcandles, jostled by the same throng as the night before, and saw the plain little face of MelanieHamilton glow into beauty as she became Melanie Wilkes. Now, Ashley was gone forever. HerAshley. No, not her Ashley now. Had he ever been hers? It was all so mixed up in her mind and hermind was so tired, so bewildered. He had said he loved her, but what was it that had separatedthem? If she could only remember. She had stilled the Countys gossiping tongue by marryingCharles, but what did that matter now? It had seemed so important once, but now it didnt seemimportant at all. All that mattered was Ashley. Now he was gone and she was married to a man shenot only did not love but for whom she had an active contempt.

Oh, how she regretted it all. She had often heard of people cutting off their noses to spite theirfaces but heretofore it had been only a figure of speech. Now she knew just what it meant Andmingled with her frenzied desire to be free of Charles and safely back at Tara, an unmarried girlagain, ran the knowledge that she had only herself to blame. Ellen had tried to stop her and shewould not listen.

So she danced through the night of Ashleys wedding in a daze and said things mechanically andsmiled and irrelevantly wondered at the stupidity of people who thought her a happy bride andcould not see that her heart was broken. Well, thank God, they couldnt see!

That night after Mammy had helped her undress and had departed and Charles had emergedshyly from the dressing room, wondering if he was to spend a second night in the horsehair chair,she burst into tears. She cried until Charles climbed into bed beside her and tried to comfort her,cried without words until no more tears would come and at last she lay sobbing quietly on his  If there had not been a war, there would have been a week of visiting about the County, withballs and barbecues in honor of the two newly married couples before they set off to Saratoga orWhite Sulphur for wedding trips. If there had not been a war, Scarlett would have had third-dayand fourth-day and fifth-day dresses to wear to the Fontaine and Calvert and Tarleton parties in herhonor. But there were no parties now and no wedding trips. A week after the wedding Charles leftto join Colonel Wade Hampton, and two weeks later Ashley and the Troop departed, leaving thewhole County bereft.

In those two weeks, Scarlett never saw Ashley alone, never had a private word with him. Noteven at the terrible moment of parting, when he stopped by Tara on his way to the train, did shehave a private talk. Melanie, bonneted and shawled, sedate in newly acquired matronly dignity,hung on his arm and the entire personnel of Tara, black and white, turned out to see Ashley off tothe war.

Melanie said: You must kiss Scarlett, Ashley. Shes my sister now, and Ashley bent andtouched her cheek with cold lips, his face drawn and taut. Scarlett could hardly take any joy fromthat kiss, so sullen was her heart at Mellys prompting it. Melanie smothered her with an embraceat parting.

You will come to Atlanta and visit me and Aunt Pittypat, wont you? Oh, darling, we want tohave you so much! We want to know Charlies wife better.

Five weeks passed during which letters, shy, ecstatic, loving, came from Charles in SouthCarolina telling of his love, his plans for the future when the war was over, his desire to become ahero for her sake and his worship of his commander, Wade Hampton. In the seventh week, therecame a telegram from Colonel Hampton himself, and then a letter, a kind, dignified letter ofcondolence. Charles was dead. The colonel would have wired earlier, but Charles, thinking hisillness a trifling one, did not wish to have his family worried. The unfortunate boy had not onlybeen cheated of the love he thought he had won but also of his high hopes of honor and glory onthe field of battle. He had died ignominiously and swiftly of pneumonia, following measles,without ever having gotten any closer to the Yankees than the camp in South Carolina.

In due time, Charles son was born and, because it was fashionable to name boys after theirfathers commanding officers, he was called Wade Hampton Hamilton. Scarlett had wept withdespair at the knowledge that she was pregnant and wished that she were dead. But she carried thechild through its time with a minimum of discomfort, bore him with little distress and recovered soquickly that Mammy told her privately it was downright commonladies should suffer more. Shefelt little affection for the child, hide the fact though she might. She had not wanted him and sheresented his coming and, now that he was here, it did not seem possible that he was hers, a part ofher.

Though she recovered physically from Wades birth in a disgracefully short time, mentally shewas dazed and sick. Her spirits drooped, despite the efforts of the whole plantation to revive them.

Ellen went about with a puckered, worried forehead and Gerald swore more frequently than usualand brought her useless gifts from Jonesboro. Even old Dr. Fontaine admitted that he was puzzled,after his tonic of sulphur, molasses and herbs failed to perk her up. He told Ellen privately that itwas a broken heart that made Scarlett so irritable and listless by turns. But Scarlett, had she wished to speak, could have told them that it was a far different and more complex trouble. She did not tellthem that it was utter boredom, bewilderment at actually being a mother and, most of all, theabsence of Ashley that made her look so woebegone.

Her boredom was acute and ever present. The County had been devoid of any entertainment orsocial life ever since the Troop had gone away to war. All of the interesting young men were gonethe four Tarletons, the two Calverts, the Fontaines, the Munroes and everyone from Jonesboro,Fayetteville and Lovejoy who was young and attractive. Only the older men, the cripples and thewomen were left, and they spent their time knitting and sewing, growing more cotton and corn,raising more hogs and sheep and cows for the army. There was never a sight of a real man exceptwhen the commissary troop under Suellens middle-aged beau, Frank Kennedy, rode by everymonth to collect supplies. The men in the commissary were not very exciting, and the sight ofFranks timid courting annoyed her until she found it difficult to be polite to him. If he and Suellenwould only get it over with!

Even if the commissary troop had been more interesting, it would not have helped her situationany. She was a widow and her heart was in the grave. At least, everyone thought it was in the graveand expected her to act accordingly. This irritated her for, try as she would, she could recallnothing about Charles except the dying-calf look on his face when she told him she would marryhim. And even that picture was fading. But she was a widow and she had to watch her behavior.

Not for her the pleasures of unmarried girls. She had to be grave and aloof. Ellen had stressed thisat great length after catching Franks lieutenant swinging Scarlett in the garden swing and makingher squeal with laughter. Deeply distressed, Ellen had told her how easily a widow might getherself talked about. The conduct of a widow must be twice as circumspect as that of a matron.

And God only knows, thought Scarlett, listening obediently to her mothers soft voice,matrons never have any fun at all. So widows might as well be dead.

A widow had to wear hideous black dresses without even a touch of braid to enliven them, noflower or ribbon or lace or even jewelry, except onyx mourning brooches or necklaces made fromthe deceaseds hair. And the black crpe veil on her bonnet had to reach to her knees, and only afterthree years of widowhood could it be shortened to shoulder length. Widows could never chattervivaciously or laugh aloud. Even when they smiled, it must be a sad, tragic smile. And, mostdreadful of all, they could in no way indicate an interest in the company of gentlemen. And shoulda gentleman be so ill bred as to indicate an interest in her, she must freeze him with a dignified butwell-chosen reference to her dead husband. Oh, yes, thought Scarlett, drearily, some widows doremarry eventually, when they are old and stringy. Though Heaven knows how they manage it,with their neighbors watching. And then its generally to some desperate old widower with a largeplantation and a dozen children.

Marriage was bad enough, but to be widowedoh, then life was over forever! How stupidpeople were when they talked about what a comfort little Wade Hampton must be to her, now thatCharles was gone. How stupid of them to say that now she had something to live for! Everyonetalked about how sweet it was that she had this posthumous token of her love and she naturally didnot disabuse their minds. But that thought was farthest from her mind. She had very little interestin Wade and sometimes it was difficult to remember that he was actually hers.

Every morning she woke up and for a drowsy moment she was Scarlett OHara again and thesun was bright in the magnolia outside her window and the mockers were singing and the sweetsmell of frying bacon was stealing to her nostrils. She was carefree and young again. Then sheheard the fretful hungry wail and alwaysalways there was a startled moment when she thought:

Why, theres a baby in the house! Then she remembered that it was her baby. It was all verybewildering.

And Ashley! Oh, most of all Ashley! For the first time in her life, she hated Tara, hated the longred road that led down the hill to the river, hated the red fields with springing green cotton. Everyfoot of ground, every tree and brook, every lane and bridle path reminded her of him. He belongedto another woman and he had gone to the war, but his ghost still haunted the roads in the twilight,still smiled at her from drowsy gray eyes in the shadows of the porch. She never heard the soundof hooves coming up the river road from Twelve Oaks that for a sweet moment she did not thinkAshley!

She hated Twelve Oaks now and once she had loved it. She hated it but she was drawn there, soshe could hear John Wilkes and the girls talk about himhear them read his letters from Virginia.

They hurt her but she had to hear them. She disliked the stiff-necked India and the foolish prattlingHoney and knew they disliked her equally, but she could not stay away from them. And every timeshe came home from Twelve Oaks, she lay down on her bed morosely and refused to get up forsupper.

It was this refusal of food that worried Ellen and Mammy more than anything else. Mammybrought up tempting trays, insinuating that now she was a widow she might eat as much as shepleased, but Scarlett had no appetite.

When Dr. Fontaine told Ellen gravely that heartbreak frequently led to a decline and womenpined away into the grave, Ellen went white, for that fear was what she had carried in her heart.

Isnt there anything to be done, Doctor?

A change of scene will be the best thing in the world for her, said the doctor, only too anxiousto be rid of an unsatisfactory patient.

So Scarlett, unenthusiastic, went off with her child, first to visit her OHara and Robillardrelatives in Savannah and then to Ellens sisters, Pauline and Eulalie, in Charleston. But she wasback at Tara a month before Ellen expected her, with no explanation of her return. They had beenkind in Savannah, but James and Andrew and their wives were old and content to sit quietly andtalk of a past in which Scarlett had no interest. It was the same with the Robillards, and Charlestonwas terrible, Scarlett thought.

Aunt Pauline and her husband, a little old man, with a formal, brittle courtesy and the absent airof one living in an older age, lived on a plantation on the river, far more isolated than Tara. Theirnearest neighbor was twenty miles away by dark roads through still jungles of cypress swamp andoak. The live oaks with their waving curtains of gray moss gave Scarlett the creeps and alwaysbrought to her mind Geralds stories of Irish ghosts roaming in shimmering gray mists. There wasnothing to do but knit all day and at night listen to Uncle Carey read aloud from the improvingworks of Mr. Bulwer-Lytton.

Eulalie, hidden behind a high-walled garden in a great house on the Battery in Charleston, wasno more entertaining. Scarlett, accustomed to wide vistas of rolling red hills, felt that she was inprison. There was more social life here than at Aunt Paulines, but Scarlett did not like the peoplewho called, with their airs and their traditions and their emphasis on family. She knew very wellthey all thought she was a child of a msalliance and wondered how a Robillard ever married anewly come Irishman. Scarlett felt that Aunt Eulalie apologized for her behind her back. Thisaroused her temper, for she cared no more about family than her father. She was proud of Geraldand what he had accomplished unaided except by his shrewd Irish brain.

And the Charlestonians took so much upon themselves about Fort Sumter! Good Heavens,didnt they realize that if they hadnt been silly enough to fire the shot that started the war someother fools would have done it? Accustomed to the brisk voices of upland Georgia, the drawlingflat voices of the low country seemed affected to her. She thought if she ever again heard voicesthat said paams for palms and hoose for house and woont for wont and Maa andPaa for Ma and Pa, she would scream. It irritated her so much that during one formal call sheaped Geralds brogue to her aunts distress. Then she went back to Tara. Better to be tormentedwith memories of Ashley than Charleston accents.

Ellen, busy night and day, doubling the productiveness of Tara to aid the Confederacy, wasterrified when her eldest daughter came home from Charleston thin, white and sharp tongued. Shehad known heartbreak herself, and night after night she lay beside the snoring Gerald, trying tothink of some way to lessen Scarletts distress. Charles aunt, Miss Pittypat Hamilton, had writtenher several times, urging her to permit Scarlett to come to Atlanta for a long visit, and now for thefirst time Ellen considered it seriously.

She and Melanie were alone in a big house and without male protection, wrote Miss Pittypat,now that dear Charlie has gone. Of course, there is my brother Henry but he does not make hishome with us. But perhaps Scarlett has told you of Henry. Delicacy forbids my putting moreconcerning him on paper. Melly and I would feel so much easier and safer if Scarlett were with us.

Three lonely women are better than two. And perhaps dear Scarlett could find some ease for hersorrow, as Melly is doing, by nursing our brave boys in the hospitals hereand, of course, Mellyand I are longing to see the dear baby.

So Scarletts trunk was packed again with her mourning clothes and off she went to Atlanta withWade Hampton and his nurse Prissy, a headful of admonitions as to her conduct from Ellen andMammy and a hundred dollars in Confederate bills from Gerald. She did not especially want to goto Atlanta. She thought Aunt Pitty the silliest of old ladies and the very idea of living under thesame roof with Ashleys wife was abhorrent. But the County with its memories was impossiblenow, and any change was welcome.

Chapter 8

AS THE TRAIN carried Scarlett northward that May morning in 1862, she thought that Atlantacouldnt possibly be so boring as Charleston and Savannah had been and, in spite of her distastefor Miss Pittypat and Melanie, she looked forward with some curiosity toward seeing how the town had fared since her last visit, in the winter before the war began.

Atlanta had always interested her more than any other town because when she was a childGerald had told her that she and Atlanta were exactly the same age. She discovered when she grewolder that Gerald had stretched the truth somewhat, as was his habit when a little stretching wouldimprove a story; but Atlanta was only nine years older than she was, and that still left the placeamazingly young by comparison with any other town she had ever heard of. Savannah andCharleston had the dignity of their years, one being well along in its second century and the otherentering its third, and in her young eyes they had always seemed like aged grandmothers fanningthemselves placidly in the sun. But Atlanta was of her own generation, crude with the crudities ofyouth and as headstrong and impetuous as herself.

The story Gerald had told her was based on the fact that she and Atlanta were christened in thesame year. In the nine years before Scarlett was born, the town had been called, first, Terminus andthen Marthasville, and not until the year of Scarletts birth had it become Atlanta.

When Gerald first moved to north Georgia, there had been no Atlanta at all, not even thesemblance of a village, and wilderness rolled over the site. But the next year, in 1836, the State hadauthorized the building of a railroad northwestward through the territory which the Cherokees hadrecently ceded. The destination of the proposed railroad, Tennessee and the West, was clear anddefinite, but its beginning point in Georgia was somewhat uncertain until, a year later, an engineerdrove a stake in the red clay to mark the southern end of the line, and Atlanta, born Terminus, hadbegun.

There were no railroads then in north Georgia, and very few anywhere else. But during the yearsbefore Gerald married Ellen, the tiny settlement, twenty-five miles north of Tara, slowly grew intoa village and the tracks slowly pushed northward. Then the railroad building era really began.

From the old city of Augusta, a second railroad was extended westward across the state to connectwith the new road to Tennessee. From the old city of Savannah, a third railroad was built first toMacon, in the heart of Georgia, and then north through Geralds own county to Atlanta, to link upwith the other two roads and give Savannahs harbor a highway to the West. From the samejunction point, the young Atlanta, a fourth railroad was constructed southwestward to Montgomeryand Mobile.

Born of a railroad, Atlanta grew as its railroads grew. With the completion of the four lines,Atlanta was now connected with the West, with the South, with the Coast and, through Augusta,with the North and East. It had become the crossroads of travel north and south and east and west,and the little village leaped to life.

In a space of time but little longer than Scarletts seventeen years, Atlanta had grown from asingle stake driven in the ground into a thriving small city of ten thousand that was the center ofattention for the whole state. The older, quieter cities were wont to look upon the bustling newtown with the sensations of a hen which has hatched a duckling. Why was the place so differentfrom the other Georgia towns? Why did it grow so fast? After all, they thought, it had nothingwhatever to recommend itonly its railroads and a bunch of mighty pushy people.

The people who settled the town called successively Terminus, Marthasville and Atlanta, were apushy people. Restless, energetic people from the older sections of Georgia and from more distant states were drawn to this town that sprawled itself around the junction of the railroads in its center.

They came with enthusiasm. They built their stores around the five muddy red roads that crossednear the depot. They built their fine homes on Whitehall and Washington streets and along the highridge of land on which countless generations of moccasined Indian feet had beaten a path calledthe Peachtree Trail. They were proud of the place, proud of its growth, proud of themselves formaking it grow. Let the older towns call Atlanta anything they pleased. Atlanta did not care.

Scarlett had always liked Atlanta for the very same reasons that made Savannah, Augusta andMacon condemn it. Like herself, the town was a mixture of the old and new in Georgia, in whichthe old often came off second best in its conflicts with the self-willed and vigorous new. Moreover,there was something personal, exciting about a town that was bornor at least christenedthesame year she was christened.

The night before had been wild and wet with rain, but when Scarlett arrived in Atlanta a warmsun was at work, bravely attempting to dry the streets that were winding rivers of red mud. In theopen space around the depot, the soft ground had been cut and churned by the constant flow oftraffic in and out until it resembled an enormous hog wallow, and here and there vehicles weremired to the hubs in the ruts. A never-ceasing line of army wagons and ambulances, loading andunloading supplies and wounded from the trains, made the mud and confusion worse as they toiledin and struggled out, drivers swearing, mules plunging and mud spattering for yards.

Scarlett stood on the lower step of the train, a pale pretty figure in her black mourning dress, hercrpe veil fluttering almost to her heels. She hesitated, unwilling to soil her slippers and hems, andlooked about in the shouting tangle of wagons, buggies and carriages for Miss Pittypat. There wasno sign of that chubby pink-cheeked lady, but as Scarlett searched anxiously a spare old negro,with grizzled kinks and an air of dignified authority, came toward her through the mud, his hat inhis hand.

Dis Miss Scarlett, ain it? Dis hyah Peter, Miss Pittys coachman. Doan step down in dat mud,

he ordered severely, as Scarlett gathered up her skirts preparatory to descending. You is as bad asMiss Pitty an she lak a chile bout gittin her feets wet. Lemme cahy you.

He picked Scarlett up with ease despite his apparent frailness and age and, observing Prissystanding on the platform of the train, the baby in her arms, he paused: Is dat air chile yo nuss?

Miss Scarlett, she too young ter be handlin Mist Charles onlies baby! But we ten to dat later.

You gal, foller me, an doan you go drappin dat baby.

Scarlett submitted meekly to being carried toward the carriage and also to the peremptorymanner in which Uncle Peter criticized her and Prissy. As they went through the mud with Prissysloshing, pouting, after them, she recalled what Charles had said about Uncle Peter.

He went through all the Mexican campaigns with Father, nursed him when he was woundedin fact, he saved his life. Uncle Peter practically raised Melanie and me, for we were very youngwhen Father and Mother died. Aunt Pitty had a falling out with her brother, Uncle Henry, aboutthat time, so she came to live with us and take care of us. She is the most helpless souljust like asweet grown-up child, and Uncle Peter treats her that way. To save her life, she couldnt make up her mind about anything, so Peter makes it up for her. He was the one who decided I should have alarger allowance when I was fifteen, and he insisted that I should go to Harvard for my senior year,when Uncle Henry wanted me to take my degree at the University. And he decided when Mellywas old enough to put up her hair and go to parties. He tells Aunt Pitty when its too cold or toowet for her to go calling and when she should wear a shawl.  Hes the smartest old darky Iveever seen and about the most devoted. The only trouble with him is that he owns the three of us,body and soul, and he knows it.

Charles words were confirmed as Peter climbed onto the box and took the whip.

Miss Pitty in a state bekase she din come ter meet you. Shes feared you mout not unnerstan

but Ah tole her she an Miss Melly jes git splashed wid mud an ruin dey new dresses an Ahdsplain ter you. Miss Scarlett, you better tek dat chile. Dat lil pickaninny gwine let it drap.

Scarlett looked at Prissy and sighed. Prissy was not the most adequate of nurses. Her recentgraduation from a skinny pickaninny with brief skirts and stiffly wrapped braids into the dignity ofa calico dress and starched white turban was an intoxicating affair. She would never have arrived atthis eminence so early in life had not the exigencies of war and the demands of the commissary departmenton Tara made it impossible for Ellen to spare Mammy or Dilcey or even Rosa or Teena.

Prissy had never been more than a mile away from Twelve Oaks or Tara before, and the trip on thetrain plus her elevation to nurse was almost more than the brain in her little black skull could bear.

The twenty-mile journey from Jonesboro to Atlanta had so excited her that Scarlett had beenforced to hold the baby all the way. Now, the sight of so many buildings and people completedPrissys demoralization. She twisted from side to side, pointed, bounced about and so jounced thebaby that he wailed miserably.

Scarlett longed for the fat old arms of Mammy. Mammy had only to lay hands on a child and ithushed crying. But Mammy was at Tara and there was nothing Scarlett could do. It was useless forher to take little Wade from Prissy. He yelled just as loudly when she held him as when Prissy did.

Besides, he would tug at the ribbons of her bonnet and, no doubt, rumple her dress. So shepretended she had not heard Uncle Peters suggestion.

Maybe Ill learn about babies sometime, she thought irritably, as the carriage jolted andswayed out of the morass surrounding the station, but Im never going to like fooling with them.

And as Wades face went purple with his squalling, she snapped crossly: Give him that sugar-tit inyour pocket, Priss. Anything to make him hush. I know hes hungry, but I cant do anything aboutthat now.

Prissy produced the sugar-tit, given her that morning by Mammy, and the babys wails subsided.

With quiet restored and with the new sights that met her eyes, Scarletts spirits began to rise a little.

When Uncle Peter finally maneuvered the carriage out of the mudholes and onto Peachtree Street,she felt the first surge of interest she had known in months. How the town had grown! It was notmuch more than a year since she had last been here, and it did not seem possible that the littleAtlanta she knew could have changed so much.

For the past year, she had been so engrossed in her own woes, so bored by any mention of war,she did not know that from the minute the fighting first began, Atlanta had been transformed. Thesame railroads which had made the town the crossroads of commerce in time of peace were now of vital strategic importance in time of war. Far from the battle lines, the town and its railroadsprovided the connecting link between the two armies of the Confederacy, the army in Virginia andthe army in Tennessee and the West And Atlanta likewise linked both of the armies with the deeperSouth from which they drew their supplies. Now, in response to the needs of war, Atlanta hadbecome a manufacturing center, a hospital base and one of the Souths chief depots for thecollecting of food and supplies for the armies in the field.

Scarlett looked about her for the little town she remembered so well. It was gone. The town shewas now seeing was like a baby grown overnight into a busy, sprawling giant.

Atlanta was humming like a beehive, proudly conscious of its importance to the Confederacy,and work was going forward night and day toward turning an agricultural section into an industrialone. Before the war there had been few cotton factories, woolen mills, arsenals and machine shopssouth of Marylanda fact of which all Southerners were proud. The South produced statesmenand soldiers, planters and doctors, lawyers and poets, but certainly not engineers or mechanics. Letthe Yankees adopt such low callings. But now the Confederate ports were stoppered with Yankeegunboats, only a trickle of blockade-run goods was slipping in from Europe, and the South wasdesperately trying to manufacture her own war materials. The North could call on the whole worldfor supplies and for soldiers, and thousands of Irish and Germans were pouring into the UnionArmy, lured by the bounty money offered by the North. The South could only turn in upon itself.

In Atlanta, there were machine factories tediously turning out machinery to manufacture warmaterialstediously, because there were few machines in the South from which they could modeland nearly every wheel and cog had to be made from drawings that came through the blockadefrom England. There were strange faces on the streets of Atlanta now, and citizens who a year agowould have pricked op their ears at the sound of even a Western accent paid no heed to the foreigntongues of Europeans who had run the blockade to build machines and turn out Confederatemunitions. Skilled men these, without whom the Confederacy would have been hard put to makepistols, rifles, cannon and powder.

Almost the poising of the towns heart could be felt as the work went forward night and day,pumping the materials of war up the railway arteries to the two battle fronts. Trains roared in andout of the town at all hours. Soot from the newly erected factories fell in showers on the whitehouses. By night, the furnaces glowed and the hammers clanged long after townsfolk were abed.

Where vacant lots had been a year before, there were now factories turning out harness, saddlesand shoes, ordnance-supply plants making rifles and cannon, rolling mills and foundries producingiron rails and freight cars to replace those destroyed by the Yankees, and a variety of industriesmanufacturing spurs, bridle bits, buckles, tents, buttons, pistols and swords. Already the foundrieswere beginning to feel the lack of iron, for little or none came through the blockade, and the minesin Alabama were standing almost idle while the miners were at the front. There were no iron picketfences, iron summerhouses, iron gates or even iron statuary on the lawns of Atlanta now, for theyhad early found their way into the melting pots of the rolling mills.

Here along Peachtree Street and near-by streets were the headquarters of the various armydepartments, each office swarming with uniformed men, the commissary, the signal corps, the mailservice, the railway transport, the provost marshal. On the outskirts of town were the remountdepots where horses and mules milled about in large corrals, and along side streets were the hospitals. As Uncle Peter told her about them, Scarlet felt that Atlanta must be a city of thewounded, for there were general hospitals, contagious hospitals, convalescent hospitals withoutnumber. And every day the trains just below Five Points disgorged more sick and more wounded.

The little town was gone and the face of the rapidly growing city was animated with never-ceasing energy and bustle. The sight of so much hurrying made Scarlett, fresh from rural leisureand quiet, almost breathless, but she liked it. There was an exciting atmosphere about the place thatuplifted her. It was as if she could actually feel the accelerated steady pulse of the towns heartbeating in time with her own.

As they slowly made their way through the mudholes of the towns chief street, she noted withinterest all the new buildings and the new faces. The sidewalks were crowded with men inuniform, bearing the insignia of all ranks and all service branches; the narrow street was jammedwith vehiclescarriages, buggies, ambulances, covered army wagons with profane driversswearing as the mules struggled through the ruts; gray-clad couriers dashed spattering through thestreets from one headquarters to another, bearing orders and telegraphic dispatches; convalescentslimped about on crutches, usually with a solicitous lady at either elbow; bugle and drum andbarked orders sounded from the drill fields where the recruits were being turned into soldiers; andwith her heart in her throat, Scarlett had her first sight of Yankee uniforms, as Uncle Peter pointedwith his whip to a detachment of dejected-looking bluecoats being shepherded toward the depot bya squad of Confederates with fixed bayonets, to entrain for the prison camp.

Oh, thought Scarlett, with the first feeling of real pleasure she had experienced since the dayof the barbecue, Im going to like it here! Its so alive and exciting!

The town was even more alive than she realized, for there were new barrooms by the dozens;prostitutes, following the army, swarmed the town and bawdy houses were blossoming withwomen to the consternation of the church people. Every hotel, boarding house and privateresidence was crammed with visitors who had come to be near wounded relatives in the bigAtlanta hospitals. There were parties and balls and bazaars every week and war weddings withoutnumber, with the grooms on furlough in bright gray and gold braid and the brides in blockade-runfinery, aisles of crossed swords, toasts drunk in blockaded champagne and tearful farewells.

Nightly the dark tree-lined streets resounded with dancing feet, and from parlors tinkled pianoswhere soprano voices blended with those of soldier guests in the pleasing melancholy of TheBugles Sang Truce and Your Letter Came, but Came Too Lateplaintive ballads that broughtexciting tears to soft eyes which had never known the tears of real grief.

As they progressed down the street, through the sucking mud, Scarlett bubbled over withquestions and Peter answered them, pointing here and there with his whip, proud to display hisknowledge.

Dat air de arsenal. Yasm, dey keeps guns an sech lak dar. Nom, dem air ain stos, deysblockade awfisses. Law, Miss Scarlett, doan you know whut blockade awfisses is? Deys awfisseswhar furriners stays dat buy us Confedruts cotton an ship it outer Chaston and Wilminton an

ship us back gunpowder. Nom, Ah ain sho whut kine of furriners dey is. Miss Pitty, she say dey isInlish but kain nobody unnerstan a wud dey says. Yasm tis powful smoky an de soot jes ruinin

Miss Pittys silk cuttins. If frum de founry an de rollin mills. An de noise dey meks at night!

Kain nobody sleep. Nom, Ah kain stop fer you ter look around. Ah done promise Miss Pitty Ahbring you straight home.  Miss Scarlett, mek yo cutsy. Dars Miss Merriwether an Miss Elsinga-bowin to you.

Scarlett vaguely remembered two ladies of those names who came from Atlanta to Tara to attendher wedding and she remembered that they were Miss Pittypats best friends. So she turned quicklywhere Uncle Peter pointed and bowed. The two were sitting in a carriage outside a drygoods store.

The proprietor and two clerks stood on the sidewalk with armfuls of bolts of cotton cloth they hadbeen displaying. Mrs. Merriwether was a tall, stout woman and so tightly corseted that her bustjutted forward like the prow of a ship. Her iron-gray hair was eked out by a curled false fringe thatwas proudly brown and disdained to match the rest of her hair. She had a round, highly coloredface in which was combined good-natured shrewdness and the habit of command. Mrs. Elsing wasyounger, a thin frail woman, who had been a beauty, and about her there still clung a fadedfreshness, a dainty imperious air.

These two ladies with a third, Mrs. Whiting, were the pillars of Atlanta. They ran the threechurches to which they belonged, the clergy, the choirs and the parishioners. They organizedbazaars and presided over sewing circles, they chaperoned balls and picnics, they knew who madegood matches and who did not, who drank secretly, who were to have babies and when. They wereauthorities on the genealogies of everyone who was anyone in Georgia, South Carolina andVirginia and did not bother their heads about the other states, because they believed that no onewho was anybody ever came from states other than these three. They knew what was decorousbehavior and what was not and they never failed to make their opinions knownMrs. Merriwetherat the top of her voice, Mrs. Elsing in an elegant die-away drawl and Mrs. Whiting in a distressedwhisper which showed how much she hated to speak of such things. These three ladies dislikedand distrusted one another as heartily as the First Triumvirate of Rome, and their close alliance wasprobably for the same reason.

I told Pitty I had to have you in my hospital, called Mrs. Merriwether, smiling. Dont you gopromising Mrs. Meade or Mrs. Whiting!

I wont, said Scarlett, having no idea what Mrs. Merriwether was talking about but feeling aglow of warmth at being welcomed and wanted. I hope to see you again soon.

The carriage plowed its way farther and halted for a moment to permit two ladies with basketsof bandages on their arms to pick precarious passages across the sloppy street on stepping stones.

At the same moment, Scarletts eye was caught by a figure on the sidewalk in a brightly coloreddresstoo bright for street wearcovered by a Paisley shawl with fringes to the heels. Turningshe saw a tall handsome woman with a bold face and a mass of red hair, too red to be true. It wasthe first time she had ever seen any woman who she knew for certain had done something to herhair and she watched her, fascinated.

Uncle Peter, who is that? she whispered.

Ah doan know.

You do, too. I can tell. Who is she?

Her name Belle Watling, said Uncle Peter, his lower lip beginning to protrude.

Scarlett was quick to catch the fact that he had not preceded the name with Miss or Mrs.

Who is she?

Miss Scarlett, said Peter darkly, laying the whip on the startled horse, Miss Pitty ain gwineter lak it you astin questions dat ain none of yo bizness. Days a passel of no-count folks in distown now dat it ain no use talkin about.

Good Heavens! thought Scarlett, reproved into silence. That must be a bad woman!

She had never seen a bad woman before and she twisted her head and stared after her until shewas lost in the crowd.

The stores and the new war buildings were farther apart now, with vacant lots between. Finallythe business section fell behind and the residences came into view. Scarlett picked them out as oldfriends, the Leyden house, dignified and stately; the Bonnells, with little white columns andgreen, blinds; the close-lipped red-brick Georgian home of the McLure family, behind its low boxhedges. Their progress was slower now, for from porches and gardens and sidewalks ladies calledto her. Some she knew slightly, others she vaguely remembered, but most of them she knew not atall. Pittypat had certainly broadcast her arrival. Little Wade had to be held up time and again, sothat ladies who ventured as far through the ooze as their carriage blocks could exclaim over him.

They all cried to her that she must join their knitting and sewing circles and their hospitalcommittees, and no one elses, and she promised recklessly to right and left.

As they passed a rambling green clapboard house, a little black girl posted on the front stepscried, Hyah she come, and Dr. Meade and his wife and little thirteen-year-old Phil emerged,calling greetings. Scarlett recalled that they too had been at her wedding. Mrs. Meade mounted hercarriage block and craned her neck for a view of the baby, but the doctor, disregarding the mud,plowed through to the side of the carriage. He was tall and gaunt and wore a pointed beard of irongray, and his clothes hung on his spare figure as though blown there by a hurricane. Atlantaconsidered him the root of all strength and all wisdom and it was not strange that he had absorbedsomething of their belief. But for all his habit of making oracular statements and his slightlypompous manner, he was as kindly a man as the town possessed.

After shaking her hand and prodding Wade in the stomach and complimenting him, the doctorannounced that Aunt Pittypat had promised on oath that Scarlett should be on no other hospital andbandage-rolling committee save Mrs. Meades.

Oh, dear, but Ive promised a thousand ladies already! said Scarlett.

Mrs. Merriwether. Ill be bound! cried Mrs. Meade indignantly. Drat the woman! I believeshe meets every train!

I promised because I hadnt a notion what it was all about, Scarlett confessed. What arehospital committees anyway?

Both the doctor and his wife looked slightly shocked at her ignorance.

But, of course, youve been buried in the country and couldnt know, Mrs. Meade apologizedfor her. We have nursing committees for different hospitals and for different days. We nurse themen and help the doctors and make bandages and clothes and when the men are well enough to leave the hospitals we take them into our homes to convalesce till they are able to go back in thearmy. And we look after the wives and families of some of the wounded who are destituteyes,worse than destitute. Dr. Meade is at the Institute hospital where my committee works, andeveryone says hes marvelous and

There, there, Mrs. Meade, said the doctor fondly. Dont go bragging on me in front of folks.

Its little enough I can do, since you wouldnt let me go in the army.

Wouldnt let!  she cried indignantly. Me? The town wouldnt let you and you know it.

Why, Scarlett, when folks heard he was intending to go to Virginia as an army surgeon, all theladies signed a petition begging him to stay here. Of course, the town couldnt do without you.

There, there, Mrs. Meade, said the doctor, basking obviously in the praise. Perhaps with oneboy at the front, thats enough for the time being.

And Im going next year! cried little Phil hopping about excitedly. As a drummer boy. Imlearning how to drum now. Do you want to hear me? Ill run get my drum.

No, not now, said Mrs. Meade, drawing him closer to her, a sudden look of strain coming overher face. Not next year, darling. Maybe the year after.

But the war will be over then! he cried petulantly, pulling away from her. And youpromised!

Over his head the eyes of the parents met and Scarlett saw the look. Darcy Meade was inVirginia and they were clinging closer to the little boy that was left.

Uncle Peter cleared his throat.

Miss Pitty were in a state when Ah lef home an ef Ah doan git dar soon, shell doneswooned.

Good-by. Ill be over this afternoon, called Mrs. Meade. And you tell Pitty for me that if youarent on my committee, shes going to be in a worse state.

The carriage slipped and slid down the muddy road and Scarlett leaned back on the cushions andsmiled. She felt better now than she had felt in months. Atlanta, with its crowds and its hurry andits undercurrent of driving excitement, was very pleasant, very exhilarating, so very much nicerthan the lonely plantation out from Charleston, where the bellow of alligators broke the night stillness;better than Charleston itself, dreaming in its gardens behind its high walls; better thanSavannah with its wide streets lined with palmetto and the muddy river beside it. Yes, andtemporarily even better than Tara, dear though Tara was.

There was something exciting about this town with its narrow muddy streets, lying amongrolling red hills, something raw and crude that appealed to the rawness and crudeness underlyingthe fine veneer that Ellen and Mammy had given her. She suddenly felt that this was where shebelonged, not in serene and quiet old cities, flat beside yellow waters.

The houses were farther and farther apart now, and leaning out Scarlett saw the red brick andslate roof of Miss Pittypats house. It was almost the last house on the north side of town. Beyondit, Peachtree road narrowed and twisted under great trees out of sight into thick quiet woods. Theneat wooden-paneled fence had been newly painted white and the front yard it enclosed was  yellow starred with the last jonquils of the season. On the front steps stood two women in blackand behind them a large yellow woman with her hands under her apron and her white teethshowing in a wide smile. Plump Miss Pittypat was teetering excitedly on tiny feet, one handpressed to her copious bosom to still her fluttering heart. Scarlett saw Melanie standing by her and,with a surge of dislike, she realized that the fly in the ointment of Atlanta would be this slight littleperson in black mourning dress, her riotous dark curls subdued to matronly smoothness and aloving smile of welcome and happiness on her heart-shaped face.

When a Southerner took the trouble to pack a trunk and travel twenty miles for a visit, the visitseldom of shorter duration than month, usually much longer. Southerners as enth(was) usiastic visitors as theywere hosts, and (a) there wasnothing unusual in relatives coming to sp(were) endthe Christmas holidays and remaining until July. Often when newly married couples went on theusual round of honeymoon visits, they lingered in some pleasant home until the birth of theirsecond child. Frequently elderly aunts and uncles came to Sunday dinner and remained until theywere buried years later. Visitors presented no problem, for houses were large, servants numerousand the feeding of several extra mouths a minor matter in that land of plenty. All ages and sexeswent visiting, honeymooners, young mothers showing off new babies, convalescents, the bereaved,girls whose parents were anxious to remove them from the dangers of unwise matches, girls whohad reached the danger age without becoming engaged and who, it was hoped, would makesuitable matches under the guidance of relatives in other places. Visitors added excitement andvariety to the slow-moving Southern life and they were always welcome.

So Scarlett had come to Atlanta with no idea as to how long she would remain. If her visitproved as dull as those in Savannah and Charleston, she would return home in a month. If her staywas pleasant, she would remain indefinitely. But no sooner had she arrived than Aunt Pitty andMelanie began a campaign to induce her to make her home permanently with them. They broughtup every possible argument. They wanted her for her own self because they loved her. They werelonely and often frightened at night in the big house, and she was so brave she gave them courage.

She was so charming that she cheered them in their sorrow. Now that Charles was dead, her placeand her sons place were with his kindred. Besides, half the house now belonged to her, throughCharles will. Last, the Confederacy needed every pair of hands for sewing, knitting, bandagerolling and nursing the wounded.

Charles Uncle Henry Hamilton, who lived in bachelor state at the Atlanta Hotel near the depot,also talked seriously to her on this subject. Uncle Henry was a short, pot-bellied, irascible oldgentleman with a pink face, a shock of long silver hair and an utter lack of patience with femininetimidities and vaporings. It was for the latter reason that he was barely on speaking terms with hissister, Miss Pittypat From childhood, they had been exact opposites in temperament and they hadbeen further estranged by his objections to the manner in which she had reared CharlesMakinga damn sissy out of a soldiers son! Years before, he had so insulted her that now Miss Pitty neverspoke of him except in guarded whispers and with so great reticence that a stranger would havethought the honest old lawyer a murderer, at the least. The insult had occurred on a day when Pittywished to draw five hundred dollars from her estate, of which he was trustee, to invest in a nonexistentgold mine. He had refused to permit it and stated heatedly that she had no more sense than a June bug and furthermore it gave him the fidgets to be around her longer than five minutes. Sincethat day, she only saw him formally, once a month, when Uncle Peter drove her to his office to getthe housekeeping money. After these brief visits, Pitty always took to her bed for the rest of theday with tears and smelling salts. Melanie and Charles, who were on excellent terms with theiruncle, had frequently offered to relieve her of this ordeal, but Pitty always set her babyish mouthfirmly and refused. Henry was her cross and she must bear him. From this, Charles and Melaniecould only infer that she took a profound pleasure in this occasional excitement, the only excitementin her sheltered life.

Uncle Henry liked Scarlett immediately because, he said, he could see that for all her sillyaffectations she had a few grains of sense. He was trustee, not only of Pittys and Melanies estates,but also of that left Scarlett by Charles. It came to Scarlett as a pleasant surprise that she was now awell-to-do young woman, for Charles had not only left her half of Aunt Pittys house but farmlands and town property as well. And the stores and warehouses along the railroad track near thedepot, which were part of her inheritance, had tripled in value since the war began. It was whenUncle Henry was giving her an account of her property that he broached the matter of her permanentresidence in Atlanta.

When Wade Hampton comes of age, hes going to be a rich young man, he said. The wayAtlanta is growing his property will be ten times more valuable in twenty years, and its only rightthat the boy should be raised where his property is, so he can learn to take care of ityes, and ofPittys and Melanies, too. Hell be the only man of the Hamilton name left before long, for I wontbe here forever.

As for Uncle Peter, he took it for granted that Scarlett had come to stay. It was inconceivable tohim that Charles only son should be reared where he could not supervise the rearing. To all thesearguments, Scarlett smiled but said nothing, unwilling to commit herself before learning how shewould like Atlanta and constant association with her in-laws. She knew, too, that Gerald and Ellenwould have to be won over. Moreover, now that she was away from Tara, she missed it dreadfully,missed the red fields and the springing green cotton and the sweet twilight silences. For the firsttime, she realized dimly what Gerald had meant when he said that the love of the land was in herblood.

So she gracefully evaded, for the time being, a definite answer as to the duration of her visit andslipped easily into the life of the red-brick house at the quiet end of Peachtree Street.

Living with Charles blood kin, seeing the home from which he came, Scarlett could nowunderstand a little better the boy who had made her wife, widow and mother in such rapidsuccession. It was easy to see why he had been so shy, so unsophisticated, so idealistic. If Charleshad inherited any of the qualities of the stern, fearless, hot-tempered soldier who had been hisfather, they had been obliterated in childhood by the ladylike atmosphere in which he had beenreared. He had been devoted to the childlike Pitty and closer than brothers usually are to Melanie,and two more sweet, unworldly women could not be found.

Aunt Pittypat had been christened Sarah lane Hamilton sixty years before, but since the long-past day when her doting father had fastened his nickname upon her, because of her airy, restless,pattering little feet, no one had called her anything else. In the years that followed that second christening, many changes had taken place in her that made the pet name incongruous. Of theswiftly scampering child, all that now remained were two tiny feet, inadequate to her weight, and atendency to prattle happily and aimlessly. She was stout, pink cheeked and silver haired andalways a little breathless from too tightly laced stays. She was unable to walk more than a block onthe tiny feet which she crammed into too small slippers. She had a heart which fluttered at anyexcitement and she pampered it shamelessly, faulting at any provocation. Everyone knew that herswoons were generally mere ladylike pretenses but they loved her enough to refrain from sayingso. Everyone loved her, spoiled her like a child and refused to take her seriouslyeveryone excepther brother Henry.

She liked gossip better than anything else in the world, even more than she liked the pleasures ofthe table, and she prattled on for hours about other peoples affairs in a harmless kindly way. Shehad no memory for names, dates or places and frequently confused the actors in one Atlanta dramawith the actors in another, which misled no one for no one was foolish enough to take seriouslyanything she said. No one ever told her anything really shocking or scandalous, for her spinsterstate must be protected even if she was sixty years old, and her friends were in a kindly conspiracyto keep her a sheltered and petted old child.

Melanie was like her aunt in many ways. She had her shyness, her sudden blushes, her modesty,but she did have common senseOf a sort, Ill admit that, Scarlett thought grudgingly. LikeAunt Pitty, Melanie had the face of a sheltered child who had never known anything but simplicityand kindness, truth and love, a child who had never looked upon harshness or evil and would notrecognize them if she saw them. Because she had always been happy, she wanted everyone abouther to be happy or, at least, pleased with themselves. To this end, she always saw the best ineveryone and remarked kindly upon it. There was no servant so stupid that she did not find someredeeming trait of loyalty and kind-heartedness, no girl so ugly and disagreeable that she could notdiscover grace of form or nobility of character in her, and no man so worthless or so boring thatshe did not view him in the light of his possibilities rather than his actualities.

Because of these qualities that sincerely and spontaneously from a generous heart, everyoneflockedabouther,forwhocanre(came) sist the charm of one who discovers in others admirablequalities undreamed of even by himself? She had more girl friends than anyone in town and moremen friends too, though she had few beaux for she lacked the willfulness and selfishness that gofar toward trapping mens hearts.

What Melanie did was no more than all Southern girls were taught to doto make those aboutthem feel at ease and pleased with themselves. It was this happy feminine conspiracy which madeSouthern society so pleasant. Women knew that a land where men were contented, uncontradictedand safe in possession of unpunctured vanity was likely to be a very pleasant place for women tolive. So, from the cradle to the grave, women strove to make men pleased with themselves, and thesatisfied men repaid lavishly with gallantry and adoration. In fact, men willingly gave the ladieseverything in the world except credit for having intelligence. Scarlett exercised the same charms asMelanie but with a studied artistry and consummate skill. The difference between the two girls layin the fact that Melanie spoke kind and flattering words from a desire to make people happy, ifonly temporarily, and Scarlett never did it except to further her own aims.

From the two he loved best, Charles had received no toughening influences, learned nothing of harshness or reality, and the home in which he grew to manhood was as soft as a birds nest. It wassuch a quiet, old-fashioned, gentle home compared with Tara. To Scarlett, this house cried out forthe masculine smells of brandy, tobacco and Macassar oil, for hoarse voices and occasional curses,for guns, for whiskers, for saddles and bridles and for hounds underfoot. She missed the sounds ofquarreling voices that always heard at Tara when Ellens back was turned, MammyquarrelingwithPork,Rosaa(were) nd Teena bickering, her own acrimonious arguments with Suellen,Geralds bawling threats. No wonder Charles had been a sissy, coming from a home like this. Here,excitement never entered in, voices were never raised, everyone deferred gently to the opinions ofothers, and, in the end, the black grizzled autocrat in the kitchen had his way. Scarlett, who hadhoped for a freer rein when she escaped Mammys supervision, discovered to her sorrow thatUncle Peters standards of ladylike conduct, especially for Mist Charles widow, were even stricterthan Mammys.

In such a household, Scarlett came back to herself, and almost before she realized it her spiritsrose to normal. She was only seventeen, she had superb health and energy, and Charles people didtheir best to make her happy. If they fell a little short of this, it was not their fault, for no one couldtake out of her heart the ache that throbbed whenever Ashleys name was mentioned. And Melaniementioned it so often! But Melanie and Pitty were tireless in planning ways to soothe the sorrowunder which they thought she labored. They put their own grief into the background in order todivert her. They fussed about her food and her hours for taking afternoon naps and for takingcarriage rides. They not only admired her extravagantly, her high-spiritedness, her figure, her tinyhands and feet, her white skin, but they said so frequently, petting, hugging and kissing her toemphasize their loving words.

Scarlett did not care for the caresses, but she basked in the compliments. No one at Tara hadever said so many charming things about her. In fact, Mammy had spent her time deflating herconceit. Little Wade was no longer an annoyance, for the family, black and white, and the neighborsidolized him and there was a never-ceasing rivalry as to whose lap he should occupy. Melanieespecially doted on him. Even in his worst screaming spells, Melanie thought him adorable andsaid so, adding, Oh, you precious darling! I just wish you were mine!

Sometimes Scarlett found it hard to dissemble her feelings, for she still thought Aunt Pitty thesilliest of old ladies and her vagueness and vaporings irritated her unendurably. She dislikedMelanie with a jealous dislike that grew as the days went by, and sometimes she had to leave theroom abruptly when Melanie, beaming with loving pride, spoke of Ashley or read his letters aloud.

But, all in all, life went on as happily as was possible under the circumstances. Atlanta was moreinteresting than Savannah Charleston Tara and it offered so many strange war-time occupationsshehadlittletime(or) tothinkormo(or) pe. But, sometimes, when she blew out the candleand burrowed her head into the pillow, she sighed and thought: If only Ashley wasnt married! Ifonly I didnt have to nurse in that plagued hospital! Oh, if only I could have some beaux!

She had immediately loathed nursing but she could not escape this duty because she was on bothMrs. Meades and Mrs. Merriwethers committees. That meant four mornings a week in thesweltering, stinking hospital with her hair tied up in a towel and a hot apron covering her fromneck to feet. Every matron, old or young, in Atlanta nursed and did it with an enthusiasm thatseemed to Scarlett little short of fanatic. They took it for granted that she was imbued with their own patriotic fervor and would have been shocked to know how slight an interest in the war shehad. Except for the ever-present torment that Ashley might be killed, the war interested her not atall, and nursing was something she did simply because she didnt know how to get out of it.

Certainly there was nothing romantic about nursing. To her, it meant groans, delirium, death andsmells. The hospitals were filled with dirty, bewhiskered, verminous men who smelled terribly andbore on their bodies wounds hideous enough to turn a Christians stomach. The hospitals stank ofgangrene, the odor assaulting her nostrils long before the doors were reached, a sickish sweet smellthat clung to her hands and hair and haunted her in her dreams. Flies, mosquitoes and gnatshovered in droning, singing swarms over the wards, tormenting the men to curses and weak sobs;and Scarlett, scratching her own mosquito bites, swung palmetto fans until her shoulders ached andshe wished that all the men were dead.

Melanie, however, did not seem to mind the smells, the wounds or the nakedness, which Scarlettthought strange in one who was the most timorous and modest of women. Sometimes whenholding basins and instruments while Dr. Meade cut out gangrened flesh, Melanie looked verywhite. And once, after such an operation, Scarlett found her in the linen closet vomiting quietlyinto a towel. But as long as she was where the wounded could see her, she was gentle, sympatheticand cheerful, and the men in the hospitals called her an angel of mercy. Scarlett would have likedthat title too, but it involved touching men crawling with lice, running fingers down throats ofunconscious patients to see if they were choking on swallowed tobacco quids, bandaging stumpsand picking maggots out of festering flesh. No, she did not like nursing!

Perhaps it might have been endurable if she had been permitted to use her charms on theconvalescent men, for many of them were attractive and well born, but this she could not do in herwidowed state. The young ladies of the town, who were not permitted to nurse for fear they wouldsee sights unfit for virgin eyes, had the convalescent wards in their charge. Unhampered bymatrimony or widowhood, they made vast inroads on the convalescents, and even the leastattractive girls, Scarlett observed gloomily, had no difficulty in getting engaged.

With the exception of desperately ill and severely wounded men, Scarletts was a completelyfeminized world and this irked her, for she neither liked nor trusted her own sex and, worse still,was always bored by it. But on three afternoons a week she had to attend sewing circles andbandage-rolling committees of Melanies friends. The girls who had all known Charles were verykind and attentive to her at these gatherings, especially Fanny Elsing and Maybelle Merriwether,the daughters of the town dowagers. But they treated her deferentially, as if she were old andfinished, and their constant chatter of dances and beaux made her both envious of their pleasuresand resentful that her widowhood barred her from such activities. Why, she was three times asattractive as Fanny and Maybelle! Oh, how unfair life was! How unfair that everyone should thinkher heart was in the grave when it wasnt at all! It was in Virginia with Ashley!

But in spite of these discomforts, Atlanta pleased her very well. And her visit lengthened as theweeks slipped by.

Chapter 9

SCARLETT sat in the window of her bedroom that midsummer morning and disconsolatelywatched the wagons and carriages full of girls, soldiers and chaperons ride gaily out Peachtreeroad in search of woodland decorations for the bazaar which was to be held that evening for thebenefit of the hospitals. The red road lay checkered in shade and sun glare beneath the over-arching trees and the many hooves kicked up little red clouds of dust. One wagon, ahead of theothers, bore four stout negroes with axes to cut evergreens and drag down the vines, and the backof this wagon was piled high with napkin-covered hampers, split-oak baskets of lunch and a dozenwatermelons. Two of the black bucks were equipped with banjo and harmonica and they wererendering a spirited version of If You Want to Have a Good Time, Jine the Cavalry. Behind themstreamed the merry cavalcade, girls cool in flowered cotton dresses, with light shawls, bonnets andmitts to protect their skins and little parasols held over their heads; elderly ladies placid andsmiling amid the laughter and carriage-to-carriage calls and jokes; convalescents from thehospitals wedged in between stout chaperons and slender girls who made great fuss and to-do overthem; officers on horseback idling at snails pace beside the carriageswheels creaking, spursjingling, gold braid gleaming, parasols bobbing, fans swishing, negroes singing. Everybody wasriding out Peachtree road to gather greenery and have a picnic and melon cutting. Everybody,thought Scarlett, morosely, except me.

They all waved and called to her as they went by and she tried to respond with a good grace, butit was difficult. A hard little pain had started in her heart and was traveling slowly up toward herthroat where it would become a lump and the lump would soon become tears. Everybody wasgoing to the picnic except her. And everybody was going to the bazaar and the ball tonight excepther. That is everybody except her and Pittypat and Melly and the other unfortunates in town whowere in mourning. But Melly and Pittypat did not seem to mind. It had not even occurred to themto want to go. It had occurred to Scarlett. And she did want to go, tremendously.

It simply wasnt fair. She had worked twice as hard as any girl in town, getting things ready forthe bazaar. She had knitted socks and baby caps and afghans and mufflers and tatted yards of laceand painted china hair receivers and mustache cups. And she had embroidered half a dozen sofa-pillow cases with the Confederate flag on them. (The stars were a bit lopsided, to be sure, some ofthem being almost round and others having six or even seven points, but the effect was good.)Yesterday she had worked until she was worn out in the dusty old bam of an Armory drapingyellow and pink and green cheesecloth on the booths that lined the walls. Under the supervision ofthe Ladies Hospital Committee, this was plain hard work and no fun at all. It was never fun to bearound Mrs. Merriwether and Mrs. Elsing and Mrs. Whiting and have them boss you like you wereone of the darkies. And have to listen to them brag about how popular their daughters were. And,worst of all, she had burned two blisters on her fingers helping Pittypat and Cookie make layercakes for raffling.

And now, having worked like a field hand, she had to retire decorously when the fun was justbeginning. Oh, it wasnt fair that she should have a dead husband and a baby yelling in the nextroom and be out of everything that was pleasant. Just a little over a year ago, she was dancing andwearing bright clothes instead of this dark mourning and was practically engaged to three boys.

She was only seventeen now and there was still a lot of dancing left in her feet. Oh, it wasnt fair!

Life was going past her, down a hot shady summer road, life with gray uniforms and jingling spurs and flowered organdie dresses and banjos playing. She tried not to smile and wave too enthusiasticallyto the men she knew best, the ones shed nursed in the hospital, but it was hard tosubdue her dimples, hard to look as though her heart were in the gravewhen it wasnt.

Her bowing and waving were abruptly halted when Pittypat entered the room, panting as usualfrom climbing the stairs, and jerked her away from the window unceremoniously.

Have you lost your mind, honey, waving at men out of your bedroom window? I declare,Scarlett, Im shocked! What would your mother say?

Well, they didnt know it was my bedroom.

But theyd suspect it was your bedroom and thats just as bad. Honey, you mustnt do thingslike that Everybody will be talking about you and saying you are fastand anyway, Mrs.

Merriwether knew it was your bedroom.

And I suppose shell tell all the boys, the old cat.

Honey, hush! Dolly Merriwethers my best friend.

Well, shes a cat just the sameoh, Im sorry, Auntie, dont cry! I forgot it was my bedroomwindow. I wont do it againII just wanted to see them go by. I wish I was going.

Honey!

Well, I do. Im so tired of sitting at home.

Scarlett, promise me you wont say things like that. People would talk so. Theyd say youdidnt have the proper respect for poor Charlie

Oh, Auntie, dont cry!

Oh, now Ive made you cry, too, sobbed Pittypat, in a pleased way, fumbling in her skirtpocket for her handkerchief.

The hard little pain had at last reached Scarletts throat and she wailed out loudnot, as Pittypatthought, for poor Charlie but because the last sounds of the wheels and the laughter were dyingaway. Melanie rustled in from her room, a worried frown puckering her forehead, a brush in herhands, her usually tidy black hair, freed of its net, fluffing about her face in a mass of tiny curlsand waves.

Darlings! What is the matter?

Charlie! sobbed Pittypat, surrendering utterly to the pleasure of her grief and burying her headon Mellys shoulder.

Oh, said Melly, her lip quivering at the mention of her brothers name. Be brave, dear. Dontcry. Oh, Scarlett!

Scarlett had thrown herself on the bed and was sobbing at the top of her voice, sobbing for herlost youth and the pleasures of youth that were denied her, sobbing with the indignation anddespair of a child who once could get anything she wanted by sobbing and now knows thatsobbing can no longer help her. She burrowed her head in the pillow and cried and kicked her feetat the tufted counterpane.

I might as well be dead! she sobbed passionately. Before such an exhibition of grief, Pittypatseasy tears ceased and Melly flew to the bedside to comfort her sister-in-law.

Dear, dont cry! Try to think how much Charlie loved you and let that comfort you! Try tothink of your darling baby.

Indignation at being misunderstood mingled with Scarletts forlorn feeling of being out ofeverything and strangled all utterance. That was fortunate, for if she could have spoken she wouldhave cried out truths coached in Geralds forthright words. Melanie patted her shoulder andPittypat tiptoed heavily about the room pulling down the shades.

Dont do that! shouted Scarlett, raising a red and swollen face from the pillow. Im not deadenough for you to pull down the shadesthough I might as well be. Oh, do go away and leave mealone!

She sank her face into the pillow again and, after a whispered conference, the two standing overher tiptoed out. She heard Melanie say to Pittypat in a low voice as they went down the stairs:

Aunt Pitty, I wish you wouldnt speak of Charles to her. You know how it always affects her.

Poor thing, she gets that queer look and I know shes trying not to cry. We mustnt make it harderfor her.

Scarlett kicked the coverlet in impotent rage, trying to think of something bad enough to say.

Gods nightgown! she cried at last, and felt somewhat relieved. How could Melanie be contentto stay at home and never have any fun and wear crpe for her brother when she was only eighteenyears old? Melanie did not seem to know, or care, that life was riding by with jingling spurs.

But shes such a stick, thought Scarlett, pounding the pillow. And she never was popular likeme, so she doesnt miss the things I miss. Andand besides shes got Ashley and II havent gotanybody! And at this fresh woe, she broke into renewed outcries.

She remained gloomily in her room until afternoon and then the sight of the returning picnickerswith wagons piled high with pine boughs, vines and ferns did not cheer her. Everyone lookedhappily tired as they waved to her again and she returned their greetings drearily. Life was ahopeless affair and certainly not worth living.

Deliverance came in the form she least expected when, during the after-dinner-nap period, Mrs.

Merriwether and Mrs. Elsing drove up. Startled at having callers at such an hour, Melanie, Scarlettand Aunt Pittypat roused themselves, hastily hooked their basques, smoothed their hair anddescended to the parlor.

Mrs. Bonnells children have the measles, said Mrs. Merriwether abruptly, showing plainlythat she held Mrs. Bonnell personally responsible for permitting such a thing to happen.

And the McLure girls have been called to Virginia, said Mrs. Elsing in her die-away voice,fanning herself languidly as if neither this nor anything else mattered very much. Dallas McLureis wounded.

How dreadful! chorused their hostesses. Is poor Dallas

No. Just through the shoulder, said Mrs. Merriwether briskly. But it couldnt possibly have happened at a worse time. The girls are going North to bring him home. But, skies above, wehavent time to sit here talking. We must hurry back to the Armory and get the decorating done.

Pitty, we need you and Melly tonight to take Mrs. Bonnells and the McLure girls places.

Oh, but, Dolly, we cant go.

Dont say cant to me, Pittypat Hamilton, said Mrs. Merriwether vigorously. We need youto watch the darkies with the refreshments. That was what Mrs. Bonnell was to do. And Melly, youmust take the McLure girls booth.

Oh, we just couldntwith poor Charlie dead only a

I know how you feel but there isnt any sacrifice too great for the Cause, broke in Mrs. Elsingin a soft voice that settled matters.

Oh, wed love to help butwhy cant you get some sweet pretty girls to take the booths?

Mrs. Merriwether snorted a trumpeting snort.

I dont know whats the young people these days. They have sense of responsibility.Allthegirlswho(come) haven(over) talreadytakenboothshavemoreexcusesthan(no) you couldshake a stick at. Oh, they dont fool me! They just dont want to be hampered in making up to theofficers, thats all. And theyre afraid their new dresses wont show off behind booth counters. Iwish to goodness that blockade runnerwhats his name?

Captain Butler, supplied Mrs. Elsing.

I wish hed bring in more hospital supplies and less hoop skirts and lace. If Ive had to look atone dress today Ive had to look at twenty dresses that he ran in. Captain ButlerIm sick of thename. Now, Pitty, I havent time to argue. You must come. Everybody will understand. Nobodywill see you in the back room anyway, and Melly wont be conspicuous. The poor McLure girls

booth is way down at the end and not very pretty so nobody will notice you.

I think we should go, said Scarlett, trying to curb her eagerness and to keep her face earnestand simple. It is the least we can do for the hospital.

Neither of the visiting ladies had even mentioned her name, and they turned and looked sharplyat her. Even in their extremity, they had not considered asking a widow of scarcely a year to appearat a social function. Scarlett bore their gaze with a wide-eyed childlike expression.

I think we should go and help to make it a success, all of us. I think I should go in the boothwith Melly becausewell, I think it would look better for us both to be there instead of just one.

Dont you think so, Melly?

Well, began Melly helplessly. The idea of appearing publicly at a social gathering while inmourning was so unheard of she was bewildered.

Scarletts right, said Mrs. Merriwether, observing signs of weakening. She rose and jerked herhoops into place. Both of youall of you must come. Now, Pitty, dont start your excuses again.

Just think how much the hospital needs money for new beds and drugs. And I know Charlie wouldlike you to help the Cause he died for.

Well, said Pittypat, helpless as always in the presence of a stronger personality, if you think people will understand.

Too good to be true! Too good to be true! said Scarletts joyful heart as she slippedunobtrusively into the pink-and yellow-draped booth that was to have been the McLure girls.

Actually she was at a party! After a years seclusion, after crpe and hushed voices and nearlygoing crazy with boredom, she was actually at a party, the biggest party Atlanta had ever seen. Andshe could see people and many lights and hear music and view for herself the lovely laces andfrocks and frills that the famous Captain Butler had run through the blockade on his last trip.

She sank down on one of the little stools behind the counter of the booth and looked up anddown the long hall which, until this afternoon, had been a bare and ugly drill room. How the ladiesmust have worked today to bring it to its present beauty. It looked lovely. Every candle andcandlestick in Atlanta must be in this hall tonight, she thought, silver ones with a dozen spranglingarms, china ones with charming figurines clustering their bases, old brass stands, erect anddignified, laden with candles of all sizes and colors, smelling fragrantly of bayberries, standing onthe gun racks that ran the length of the hall, on the long flower-decked tables, on booth counters,even on the sills of the open windows where, the draughts of warm summer air were just strongenough to make them flare.

In the center of the hall the huge ugly lamp, hanging from the ceiling by rusty chains, wascompletely transformed by twining ivy and wild grapevines that were already withering from theheat. The walls were banked with pine branches that gave out a spicy smell, making the corners ofthe room into pretty bowers where the chaperons and old ladies would sit. Long graceful ropes ofivy and grapevine and smilax were hung everywhere, in looping festoons on the walls, drapedabove the windows, twined in scallops all over the brightly colored cheesecloth booths. Andeverywhere amid the greenery, on flags and bunting, blazed the bright stars of the Confederacy ontheir background of red and blue.

The raised platform for the musicians was especially artistic. It was completely hidden fromview by the banked greenery and starry bunting and Scarlett knew that every potted and tubbedplant in town was there, coleus, geranium, hydrangea, oleander, elephant eareven Mrs. Elsingsfour treasured rubber plants, which were given posts of honor at the four corners.

At the other end of the hall from the platform, the ladies had eclipsed themselves. On this wallhung large pictures of President Davis and Georgias own Little Alec Stephens, Vice-Presidentof the Confederacy. Above them was an enormous flag and, beneath, on long tables was the loot ofthe gardens of the town, ferns, banks of roses, crimson and yellow and white, proud sheaths ofgolden gladioli, masses of varicolored nasturtiums, tall stiff hollyhocks rearing deep maroon andcreamy heads above the other flowers. Among them, candles burned serenely like altar fires. Thetwo faces looked down on the scene, two faces as different as could be possible in two men at thehelm of so momentous an undertaking: Davis with the flat cheeks and cold eyes of an ascetic, histhin proud lips set firmly; Stephens with dark burning eyes deep socketed in a face that had knownnothing but sickness and pain and had triumphed over them with humor and with firetwo facesthat were greatly loved.

The elderly ladies of the committee in whose hands rested the responsibility for the whole bazaar rustled in as importantly as full-rigged ships, hurried the belated young matrons andgiggling girls into their booths, and then swept through the doors into the back rooms where therefreshments were being laid out. Aunt Pitty panted out after them.

The musicians clambered upon their platform, black, grinning, their fat cheeks already shiningwith perspiration, and began tuning their fiddles and sawing and whanging with their bows inanticipatory importance. Old Levi, Mrs. Merriwethers coachman, who had led the orchestras forevery bazaar, ball and wedding since Atlanta was named Marthasville, rapped with his bow forattention. Few except the ladies who were conducting the bazaar had arrived yet, but all eyesturned toward him. Then the fiddles, bull fiddles, accordions, banjos and knuckle-bones broke intoa slow rendition of Lorenatoo slow for dancing, the dancing would come later when thebooths were emptied of their wares. Scarlett felt her heart beat faster as the sweet melancholy ofthe waltz came to her:

Theyearscreepslowlyby,Lorena!

Thesnow isonthegrassagain.

Thesunsfardownthesky,Lorena .

...

One-two-three, one-two-three, dip-swaythree, turn two-three. What a beautiful waltz! Sheextended her hands slightly, closed her eyes and swayed with the sad haunting rhythm. There wassomething about the tragic melody and Lorenas lost love that mingled with her own excitementand brought a lump into her throat.

Then, as if brought into being by the waltz music, sounds floated in from the shadowy moonlitstreet below, the trample of horses hooves and the sound of carriage wheels, laughter on the warmsweet air and the soft acrimony of negro voices raised in argument over hitching places for thehorses. There was confusion on the stairs and light-hearted merriment, the mingling of girls freshvoices with the bass notes of their escorts, airy cries of greeting and squeals of joy as girlsrecognized friends from whom they had parted only that afternoon.

Suddenly the hall burst into life. It was full of girls, girls who floated in butterfly bright dresses,hooped out enormously, lace pantalets peeping from beneath; round little white shoulders bare, andfaintest traces of soft little bosoms showing above lace flounces; lace shawls carelessly hangingfrom arms; fans spangled and painted, fans of swans-down and peacock feathers, dangling atwrists by tiny velvet ribbons; girls with masses of golden curls about their necks and fringed goldearbobs that tossed and danced with their dancing curls. Laces and silks and braid and ribbons, allblockade run, all the more precious and more proudly worn because of it, finery flaunted with anadded pride as an extra affront to the Yankees.

Not all the Sowers of the town were standing in tribute to the leaders of the Confederacy. Thesmallest, the most fragrant blossoms bedecked the girls. Tea roses tucked behind pink ears, capejessamine and bud roses in round little garlands over cascades of side curls, blossoms thrustdemurely into satin sashes, flowers that before the night was over would find their way into thebreast pockets of gray uniforms as treasured souvenirs.

There were so many uniforms in the crowdso many uniforms on so many men whom Scarlettknew, men she had met on hospital cots, on the streets, at the drill ground. They were suchresplendent uniforms, brave with shining buttons and dazzling with twined gold braid on cuffs andcollars, the red and yellow and blue stripes on the trousers, for the different branches of the service,setting off the gray to perfection. Scarlet and gold sashes swung to and fro, sabers glittered andbanged against shining boots, spurs rattled and jingled.

Such handsome men, thought Scarlett, with a swell of pride in her heart, as the men calledgreetings, waved to friends, bent low over the hands of elderly ladies. All of them were so younglooking, even with their sweeping yellow mustaches and full black and brown beards, so handsome,so reckless, with their arms in slings, with head bandages startlingly white across sun-browned faces. Some of them were on crutches and how proud were the girls who solicitouslyslowed their steps to their escorts hopping pace! There was one gaudy splash of color among theuniforms that put the girls bright finery to shame and stood out in the crowd like a tropical birdaLouisiana Zouave, with baggy blue and white striped pants, cream gaiters and tight little redjacket, a dark, grinning little monkey of a man, with his arm in a black silk sling. He was MaybelleMerriwethers especial beau, Ren Picard. The whole hospital must have turned out, at leasteverybody who could walk, and all the men on furlough and sick leave and all the railroad andmail service and hospital and commissary departments between here and Macon. How pleased theladies would be! The hospital should make a mint of money tonight.

There was a ruffle of drums from the street below, the tramp of feet, the admiring cries ofcoachmen. A bugle blared and a bass voice shouted the command to break ranks. In a moment, theHome Guard and the militia unit in their bright uniforms shook the narrow stairs and crowded intothe room, bowing, saluting, shaking hands. There were boys in the Home Guard, proud to beplaying at war, promising themselves they would be in Virginia this time next year, if the warwould just last that long; old men with white beards, wishing they were younger, proud to march inuniform in the reflected glory of sons at the front In the militia, there were many middle-aged menand some older men but there was a fair sprinkling of men of military age who did not carrythemselves quite so jauntily as their elders or their juniors. Already people were beginning towhisper, asking why they were not with Lee.

How would they all get into the hall! It had seemed such a large place a few minutes before, andnow it was packed, warm with summer-night odors of sachet and cologne water and hair pomadeand burning bayberry candles, fragrant with flowers, faintly dusty as many feet trod the old drillfloors. The din and hubbub of voices made it almost impossible to hear anything and, as if feelingthe joy and excitement of the occasion, old Levi choked off Lorena in mid-bar, rapped sharplywith his bow and, sawing away for dear life, the orchestra burst into Bonnie Blue Flag.

A hundred voices took it up, sang it shouted it like a cheer. The Home Guard bugler, climbingonto the platform, caught up with the music just as the chorus began, and the high silver notessoared out thrillingly above the massed singing, causing goose bumps to break out on bare armsand cold chills of deeply felt emotion to fly down spines:

Hurrah!Hurrah!FortheSouthernRights,hurrah!

HurrahfortheBonnieBlueFlag Thatbearsasinglestar!

They crashed into the second verse and Scarlett, singing with the rest, heard the high sweetsoprano of Melanie mounting behind her, clear and true and thrilling as the bugle notes. Turning,she saw that Melly was standing with her hands clasped to her breast her eyes closed, and tinytears oozing from the corners. She smiled at Scarlett, whimsically, as the music ended, making alittle moue of apology as she dabbed with her handkerchief.

Im so happy, she whispered, and so proud of the soldiers that I just cant help crying aboutit.

There was a deep, almost fanatic glow in her eyes that for a moment lit up her plain little faceand made it beautiful.

The same look was on the faces of all the women as the song ended, tears of pride on cheeks,pink or wrinkled, smiles on lips, a deep hot glow in eyes, as they turned to their men, sweetheart tolover, mother to son, wife to husband. They were all beautiful with the blinding beauty thattransfigures even the plainest woman when she is utterly protected and utterly loved and is givingback that love a thousandfold.

They loved their men, they believed in them, they trusted them to the last breaths of their bodies.

How could disaster ever come to women such as they when their stalwart gray line stood betweenthem and the Yankees? Had there ever been such men as these since the first dawn of the world, soheroic, so reckless, so gallant, so tender? How could anything but overwhelming victory come to aCause as just and right as theirs? A Cause they loved as much as they loved their men, a Causethey served with their hands and their hearts, a Cause they talked about, thought about, dreamedabouta Cause to which they would sacrifice these men if need be, and bear their loss as proudlyas the men bore their battle flags.

It was high tide of devotion and pride in their hearts, high tide of the Confederacy, for finalvictory was at hand. Stonewall Jacksons triumphs in the Valley and the defeat of the Yankees inthe Seven Days Battle around Richmond showed that clearly. How could it be otherwise with suchleaders as Lee and Jackson? One more victory and the Yankees would be on their knees yelling forpeace and the men would be riding home and there would be kissing and laughter. One morevictory and the war was over!

Of course, there were empty chairs and babies who would never see their fathers faces andunmarked graves by lonely Virginia creeks and in the still mountains of Tennessee, but was thattoo great a price to pay for such a Cause? Silks for the ladies and tea and sugar were hard to get;but that was something to joke about. Besides, the dashing blockade runners were bringing in thesevery things under the Yankees disgruntled noses, and that made the possession of them manytimes more thrilling. Soon Raphael Semmes and the Confederate Navy would tend to those Yankeegunboats and the ports would be wide open. And England was coming in to help the Confederacywin the war, because the English mills were standing idle for want of Southern cotton. Andnaturally the British aristocracy sympathized with the Confederacy, as one aristocrat with another,against a race of dollar lovers like the Yankees.

So the women swished their silks and laughed and, looking on their men with hearts bursting with pride, they knew that love snatched in the face of danger and death was doubly sweet for thestrange excitement that went with it.

When first she looked at the crowd, Scarletts heart had thump-thumped with the unaccustomedexcitement of being at a party, but as she half-comprehendingly saw the high-hearted look on thefaces about her, her joy began to evaporate. Every woman present was blazing with an emotion shedid not feel. It bewildered and depressed her. Somehow, the hall did not seem so pretty nor thegirls so dashing, and the white heat of devotion to the Cause that was still shining on every faceseemedwhy, it just seemed silly!

In a sudden flash of self-knowledge that made her mouth pop open with astonishment, sherealized that she did not share with these women their fierce pride, their desire to sacrificethemselves and everything they had for the Cause. Before horror made her think: Nono! Imustnt think such things! Theyre wrongsinful, she knew the Cause meant nothing at all to herand that she was bored with heating other people talk about it with that fanatic look in their eyes.

The Cause didnt seem sacred to her. The war didnt seem to be a holy affair, but a nuisance thatkilled men senselessly and cost money and made luxuries hard to get. She saw that she was tired ofthe endless knitting and the endless bandage rolling and lint picking that roughened the cuticle ofher nails. And oh, she was so tired of the hospital! Tired and bored and nauseated with thesickening gangrene smells and the endless moaning, frightened by the look that coming death gaveto sunken faces.

She looked furtively around her, as the treacherous, blasphemous thoughts rushed through hermind, fearful that someone might find them written clearly upon her face. Oh, why couldnt shefeel like those other women! They were whole hearted and sincere in their devotion to the Cause.

They really meant everything they said and did. And if anyone should ever suspect that she No,no one must ever know! She must go on making a pretense of enthusiasm and pride in the Causewhich she could not feel, acting out her part of the widow of a Confederate officer who bears hergrief bravely, whose heart is in the grave, who feels that her husbands death meant nothing if itaided the Cause to triumph.

Oh, why was she different, apart from these loving women? She could never love anything oranyone so selflessly as they did. What a lonely feeling it wasand she had never been lonelyeither in body or spirit before. At first she tried to stifle the thoughts, but the hard self-honesty thatlay at the base of her nature would not permit it And so, while the bazaar went on, while she andMelanie waited on the customers who came to their booth, her mind was busily working, trying tojustify herself to herselfa task which she seldom found difficult.

The other women were simply silly and hysterical with their talk of patriotism and the Cause,and the men were almost as bad with their talk of vital issues and States Rights. She, ScarlettOHara Hamilton, alone had good hard-headed Irish sense. She wasnt going to make a fool out ofherself about the Cause, but neither was she going to make a fool out of herself by admitting hertrue feelings. She was hard-headed enough to be practical about the situation, and no one wouldever know how she felt How surprised the bazaar would be if they knew what she really wasthinking! How shocked if she suddenly climbed on the bandstand and declared that she thought thewar ought to stop, so everybody could go home and tend to their cotton and there could be partiesand beaux again and plenty of pale green dresses.

For a moment, her self-justification buoyed her up but still she looked about the hall withdistaste. The McLure girls booth was inconspicuous, as Mrs. Merriwether had said, and there werelong intervals when no one came to their corner and Scarlett had nothing to do but look enviouslyon the happy throng. Melanie sensed her moodiness but, crediting it to longing for Charlie, did nottry to engage her in conversation. She busied herself arranging the articles in the booth in moreattractive display, while Scarlett sat and looked glumly around the room. Even the banked flowersbelow the pictures of Mr. Davis and Mr. Stephens displeased her.

It looks like an altar, she sniffed. And the way they all carry on about those two, they mightas well be the Father and the Son! Then smitten with sudden fright at her irreverence she beganhastily to cross herself by way of apology but caught herself in time.

Well, its true, she argued with her conscience. Everybody carries on like they were holy andthey arent anything but men, and mighty unattractive looking ones at that.

Of course, Mr. Stephens couldnt help how he looked for he had been an invalid all his life, butMr. Davis She looked up at the cameo clean, proud face. It was his goatee that annoyed her themost. Men should either be clean shaven, mustached or wear full beards.

That little wisp looks like it was just the best he could do, she thought, not seeing in his facethe cold hard intelligence that was carrying the weight of a new nation.

No, she was not happy now, and at first she had been radiant with the pleasure of being in acrowd. Now just being present was not enough. She was at the bazaar but not a part of it. No onepaid her any attention and she was the only young unmarried woman present who did not have abeau. And all her life she had enjoyed the center of the stage. It wasnt fair! She was seventeenyears old and her feet were patting the floor, wanting to skip and dance. She was seventeen yearsold and she had a husband lying at Oakland Cemetery and a baby in his cradle at Aunt Pittypatsand everyone thought she should be content with her lot. She had a whiter bosom and a smallerwaist and a tinier foot than any girl present, but for all they mattered she might just as well be lyingbeside Charles with Beloved Wife of carved over her.

She wasnt a girl who could dance and flirt and she wasnt a wife who could sit with other wivesand criticize the dancing and flirting girls. And she wasnt old enough to be a widow. Widowsshould be oldso terribly old they didnt want to dance and flirt and be admired. Oh, it wasnt fairthat she should have to sit here primly and be the acme of widowed dignity and propriety when shewas only seventeen. It wasnt fair that she must keep her voice low and her eyes cast modestlydown, when men, attractive ones, too, came to their booth.

Every girl in Atlanta was three deep in men. Even the plainest girls were carrying on like bellesand, oh, worst of all, they were carrying on in such lovely, lovely dresses!

Here she sat like a crow with hot black taffeta to her wrists and buttoned up to her chin, with noteven a hint of lace or braid, not a jewel except Ellens onyx mourning brooch, watching tacky-looking girls hanging on the arms of good-looking men. All because Charles Hamilton had had themeasles. He didnt even die in a fine glow of gallantry in battle, so she could brag about him.

Rebelliously she leaned her elbows on the counter and looked at the crowd, flouting Mammysoft-repeated admonition against leaning on elbows and making them ugly and wrinkled. What did it matter if they did get ugly? Shed probably never get a chance to show them again. She lookedhungrily at the frocks floating by, butter-yellow watered silks with garlands of rosebuds; pinksatins with eighteen flounces edged with tiny black velvet ribbons; baby blue taffeta, ten yards inthe skirt and foamy with cascading lace; exposed bosoms; seductive flowers. MaybelleMerriwether went toward the next booth on the arm of the Zouave, in an apple-green tarlatan sowide that it reduced her waist to nothingness. It Was showered and flounced with cream-coloredChantilly lace that had come from Charleston on the last blockader, and Maybelle was flaunting itas saucily as if she and not the famous Captain Butler had run the blockade.

How sweet Id look in that dress, thought Scarlett, a savage envy in her heart. Her waist is asbig as a cows. That green is just my color and it would make my eyes look Why will blondestry to wear that color? Her skin looks as green as an old cheese. And to think Ill never wear thatcolor again, not even when I do get out of mourning. No, not even if I do manage to get marriedagain. Then Ill have to wear tacky old grays and tans and lilacs.

For a brief moment she considered the unfairness of it all. How short was the time for fun, forpretty clothes, for dancing, for coquetting! Only a few, too few years! Then you married and woredull-colored dresses and had babies that ruined your waist line and sat in corners at dances withother sober matrons and only emerged to dance with your husband or with old gentlemen whostepped on your feet. If you didnt do these things, the other matrons talked about you and thenyour reputation was ruined and your family disgraced. It seemed such a terrible waste to spend allyour little girlhood learning how to be attractive and how to catch men and then only use theknowledge for a year or two. When she considered her training at the hands of Ellen and Mammy,she knew it had been thorough and good because it had always reaped results. There were set rulesto be followed, and if you followed them success crowned your efforts.

With old ladies you were sweet and guileless and appeared as simple minded as possible, for oldladies were sharp and they watched girls as jealously as cats, ready to pounce on any indiscretionof tongue or eye. With old gentlemen, a girl was pert and saucy and almost, but not quite,flirtatious, so that the old fools vanities would be tickled. It made them feel devilish and youngand they pinched your cheek and declared you Were a minx. And, of course, you always blushedon such occasions, otherwise they would pinch you with more pleasure than was proper and thentell their sons that you were fast.

With young girls and young married women, you slopped over with sugar and kissed them everytime you met them, even if it was ten times a day. And you put your arms about their waists andsuffered them to do the same to you, no matter how much you disliked it You admired their frocksor their babies indiscriminately and teased about beaux and complimented husbands and giggledmodestly and denied that you had any charms at all compared with theirs. And, above all, younever said what you really thought about anything, any more than they said what they reallythought.

Other womens husbands you let severely alone, even if they were your own discarded beaux,and no matter how temptingly attractive they were. If you were too nice to young husbands, theirwives said you were fast and you got a bad reputation and never caught any beaux of your own.

But with young bachelorsah, that was a different matter! You could laugh softly at them and when they came flying to see why you laughed, you could refuse to tell them and laugh harder andkeep them around indefinitely trying to find out. You could promise, with your eyes, any numberof exciting things that would make a man maneuver to get you alone. And, having gotten youalone, you could be very, very hurt or very, very angry when he tried to kiss you. You could makehim apologize for being a cur and forgive him so sweetly that he would hang around trying to kissyou a second time. Sometimes, but not often, you did let him kiss you. (Ellen and Mammy had nottaught her that but she learned it was effective.) Then you cried and declared you didnt know whathad come over you and that he couldnt ever respect you again. Then he had to dry your eyes andusually he proposed, to show just how much he did respect you. And then there were Oh, therewere so many things to do to bachelors and she knew them all, the nuance of the sidelong glance,the half-smile behind the fan, the swaying of the hips so that skirts swung like a bell, the tears, thelaughter, the flattery, the sweet sympathy. Oh, all the tricks that never failed to workexcept withAshley.

No, it didnt seem right to learn all these smart tricks, use them so briefly and then put themaway forever. How wonderful it would be never to marry but to go on being lovely in pale greendresses and forever courted by handsome men. But, if you went on too long, you got to be an oldmaid like India Wilkes and everyone said poor thing in that smug hateful way. No, after all itwas better to marry and keep your self-respect even if you never had any more fun.

Oh, what a mess life was! Why had she been such an idiot as to marry Charles of all people andhave her life end at sixteen?

Her indignant and hopeless reverie was broken when the crowd began pushing back against thewalls, the ladies carefully holding their hoops so that no careless contact should turn them upagainst their bodies and show more pantalets than was proper. Scarlett tiptoed above the crowd andsaw the captain of the militia mounting the orchestra platform. He shouted orders and half of theCompany fell into line. For a few minutes they went through a brisk drill that brought perspirationto their foreheads and cheers and applause from the audience. Scarlett clapped her hands dutifullywith the rest and, as the soldiers pushed forward toward the punch and lemonade booths after theywere dismissed, she turned to Melanie, feeling that she had better begin her deception about theCause as soon as possible.

They looked fine, didnt they? she said.

Melanie was fussing about with the knitted things on the counter.

Most of them would look a lot finer in gray uniforms and in Virginia, she said, and she did nottrouble to lower her voice.

Several of the proud mothers of members of the militia were standing close by and overheardthe remark. Mrs. Guinan turned scarlet and then white, for her twenty-five-year-old Willie was inthe company.

Scarlett was aghast at such words coming from Melly of all people.

Why, Melly!

You know its true, Scarlet. I dont mean the little boys and the old gentlemen. But a lot of themilitia are perfectly able to tote a rifle and thats what they ought to be doing this minute.

Butbut began Scarlett, who had never considered the matter before. Somebodys got tostay home to What was it Willie Guinan had told her by way of excusing his presence inAtlanta? Somebodys got to stay home to protect the state from invasion.

Nobodys invading us and nobodys going to, said Melly coolly, looking toward a group of themilitia. And the best way to keep out invaders is to go to Virginia and beat the Yankees there. Andas for all this talk about the militia staying here to keep the darkies from risingwhy, its thesilliest thing I ever heard of. Why should our people rise? Its just a good excuse for cowards. Illbet we could lick the Yankees in a month if all the militia of all the states went to Virginia. Sothere!

Why, Melly! cried Scarlett again, staring.

Mellys soft dark eyes were flashing angrily. My husband wasnt afraid to go and neither wasyours. And Id rather theyd both be dead than here at home Oh, darling, Im sorry. Howthoughtless and cruel of me!

She stroked Scarletts arm appealingly and Scarlett stared at her. But it was not of dead Charlesshe was thinking. It was of Ashley. Suppose he too were to die? She turned quickly and smiledautomatically as Dr. Meade walked up to their booth.

Well, girls, he greeted them, it was nice of you to come. I know what a sacrifice it must havebeen for you to come out tonight. But its all for the Cause. And Im going to tell you a secret. Ivea surprise way for making some more money tonight for the hospital, but Im afraid some of theladies are going to be shocked about it.

He stopped and chuckled as he tugged at his gray goatee.

Oh, what? Do tell!

On second thought I believe Ill keep you guessing, too. But you girls must stand up for me ifthe church members want to run me out of town for doing it. However, its for the hospital Youllsee. Nothing like this has ever been done before.

He went off pompously toward a group of chaperons in one corner, and just as the two girls hadturned to each other to discuss the possibilities of the secret, two old gentlemen bore down on thebooth, declaring in loud voices that they wanted ten miles of tatting. Well, after all, old gentlemenwere better than no gentlemen at all, thought Scarlett, measuring out the tatting and submittingdemurely to being chucked under the chin. The old blades charged off toward the lemonade boothand others took their places at the counter. Their booth did not have so many customers as did theother booths where the tootling laugh of Maybelle Merriwether sounded and Fanny Elsingsgiggles and the Whiting girls repartee made merriment. Melly sold useless stuff to men who couldhave no possible use for it as quietly and serenely as a shopkeeper, and Scarlett patterned herconduct on Mellys.

There were crowds in front of every other counter but theirs, girls chattering, men buying. Thefew who came to them talked about how they went to the university with Ashley and what a finesoldier he was or spoke in respectful tones of Charles and how great a loss to Atlanta his death hadbeen.

Then the music broke into the rollicking strains of Johnny Booker, hep dis Nigger! andScarlett thought she would scream. She wanted to dance. She wanted to dance. She looked acrossthe floor and tapped her foot to the music and her green eyes blazed so eagerly that they fairlysnapped. All the way across the floor, a man, newly come and standing in the doorway, saw them,started in recognition and watched closely the slanting eyes in the sulky, rebellious face. Then hegrinned to himself as he recognized the invitation that any male could read.

He was dressed in black broadcloth, a tall man, towering over the officers who stood near him,bulky in the shoulders but tapering to a small waist and absurdly small feet in varnished boots. Hissevere black suit, with fine ruffled shirt and trousers smartly strapped beneath high insteps, wasoddly at variance with his physique and face, for he was foppishly groomed, the clothes of a dandyon a body that was powerful and latently dangerous in its lazy grace. His hair was jet black, and hisblack mustache was small and closely clipped, almost foreign looking compared with the dashing,swooping mustaches of the cavalrymen by. He looked, and was, man of lusty and unashamedappetites.Hehadanairofutteras(near) surance,ofdispleasinginsole(a) nce about him, andthere was a twinkle of malice in his bold eyes as he stared at Scarlett, until finally, feeling his gaze,she looked toward him.

Somewhere in her mind, the bell of recognition rang, but for the moment she could not recallwho he was. But he was the first man in months who had displayed an interest in her, and shethrew him a gay smile. She made a little curtsy as he bowed, and then, as he straightened andstarted toward her with a peculiarly lithe Indian-like gait, her hand went to her mouth in horror, forshe knew who he was.

Thunderstruck, she stood as if paralyzed while he made his way through the crowd. Then sheturned blindly, bent on flight into the refreshment rooms, but her skirt caught on a nail of thebooth. She jerked furiously at it, tearing it and, in an instant, he was beside her.

Permit me, he Said bending over and disentangling the flounce. I hardly hoped that youwould recall me, Miss OHara.

His voice was oddly pleasant to the ear, the well-modulated voice of a gentleman, resonant andoverlaid with the flat slow drawl of the Charlestonian.

She looked up at him imploringly, her face crimson with the shame of their last meeting, andmet two of the blackest eyes she had ever seen, dancing in merciless merriment. Of all the peoplein the world to turn up here, this terrible person who had witnessed that scene with Ashley whichstill gave her nightmares; this odious wretch who ruined girls and was not received by nice people;this despicable man who had said, and with good cause, that she was not a lady.

At the sound of his voice, Melanie turned and for the first time in her life Scarlett thanked Godfor the existence of her sister-in-law.

Whyitsits Mr. Rhett Butler, isnt it? said Melanie with a little smile, putting out herhand. I met you

On the happy occasion of the announcement of your betrothal, he finished, bending over herhand. It is kind of you to recall me.

And what are you doing so far from Charleston, Mr. Butler?

A boring matter of business, Mrs. Wilkes. I will be in and out of your town from now on. I findI must not only bring in goods but see to the disposal of them.

Bring in began Melly, her brow wrinkling, and then she broke into a delighted smile. Why,youyou must be the famous Captain Butler weve been hearing so much aboutthe blockaderunner. Why, every girl here is wearing dresses you brought in. Scarlett, arent you thrilledwhats the matter, dear? Are you faint? Do sit down.

Scarlett sank to the stool, her breath coming so rapidly she feared the lacings of her stays wouldburst. Oh, what a terrible thing to happen! She had never thought to meet this man again. Hepicked up her black fan from the counter and began fanning her solicitously, too solicitously, hisface grave but his eyes still dancing.

It is quite warm in here, he said. No wonder Miss OHara is faint. May I lead you to awindow?

No, said Scarlett, so rudely that Melly stared.

She is not Miss OHara any longer, said Melly. She is Mrs. Hamilton. She is my sister now,

and Melly bestowed one of her fond little glances on her. Scarlett felt that she would strangle at theexpression on Captain Butlers swarthy piratical face.

I am sure that is a great gain to two charming ladies, said he, making a slight bow. That wasthe kind of remark all men made, but when he said it it seemed to her that he meant just theopposite.

Your husbands are here tonight, I trust, on this happy occasion? It would be a pleasure to renewacquaintances.

My husband is in Virginia, said Melly with a proud lift of her head. But Charles Hervoice broke.

He died in camp, said Scarlett flatly. She almost snapped the words. Would this creature nevergo away? Melly looked at her, startled, and the Captain made a gesture of self-reproach.

My dear ladieshow could I! You must forgive me. But permit a stranger to offer the comfortof saying that to die for ones country is to live forever.

Melanie smiled at him through sparkling tears while Scarlett felt the fox of wrath and impotenthate gnaw at her vitals. Again he had made a graceful remark, the kind of compliment anygentleman would pay under such circumstances, but he did not mean a word of it. He was jeeringat her. He knew she hadnt loved Charles. And Melly was just a big enough fool not to see throughhim. Oh, please God, dont let anybody else see through him, she thought with a start of terror.

Would he tell what he knew? Of course he wasnt a gentleman and there was no telling what menwould do when they werent gentlemen. There was no standard to judge them by. She looked up athim and saw that his mouth was pulled down at the corners in mock sympathy, even while heswished the fan. Something in his look challenged her spirit and brought her strength back in asurge of dislike. Abruptly she snatched the fan from his hand.

Im quite all right, she said tartly. Theres no need to blow my hair out of place.

Scarlett, darling! Captain Butler, you must forgive her. Sheshe isnt herself when she hears poor Charlies name spokenand perhaps, after all, we shouldnt have come here tonight. Werestill in mourning, you see, and its quite a strain on herall this gaiety and music, poor child.

I quite understand, he said with elaborate gravity, but as he turned and gave Melanie asearching look that went to the bottom of her sweet worried eyes, his expression changed, reluctantrespect and gentleness coming over his dark face. I think youre a courageous little lady, Mrs.

Wilkes.

Not a word about me! thought Scarlett indignantly, as Melly smiled in confusion andanswered,Dear me, no, Captain Butler! The hospital committee just had to have us for this booth becauseat the last minute A pillow case? Heres a lovely one with a flag on it.

She turned to three cavalrymen who appeared at her counter. For a moment, Melanie thoughthow nice Captain Butler was. Then she wished that something more substantial than cheeseclothwas between her skirt and the spittoon that stood just outside the booth, for the aim of thehorsemen with amber streams of tobacco juice was not so unerring as with their long horse pistols.

Then she forgot about the Captain, Scarlett and the spittoons as more customers crowded to her.

Scarlett sat quietly on the stool fanning herself, not daring to look up, wishing Captain Butlerback on the deck of his ship where he belonged.

Your husband has been dead long?

Oh, yes, a long time. Almost a year.

An aeon, Im sure.

Scarlett was not sure what an aeon was, but there was no mistaking the baiting quality of hisvoice, so she said nothing.

Had you been married long? Forgive my questions but I have been away from this section forso long.

Two months, said Scarlett, unwillingly.

A tragedy, no less, his easy voice continued.

Oh, damn him, she thought violently. If he was any other man in the world I could simply freezeup and order him off. But he knows about Ashley and he knows I didnt love Charlie. And myhands are tied. She said nothing, still looking down at her fan.

And this is your first social appearance?

I know it looks quite odd, she explained rapidly. But the McLure girls who were to take thisbooth were called away and there was no one else, so Melanie and I

No sacrifice is too great for the Cause.

Why, that was what Mrs. Elsing had said, but when she said it it didnt sound the same way. Hotwords started to her lips but she choked them back. After all, she was here, not for the Cause, butbecause she was tired of sitting home.

I have always thought, he said reflectively, that the system of mourning, of immuring women in crpe for the rest of their lives and forbidding them normal enjoyment is just as barbarous as theHindu suttee.

Settee?

He laughed and she blushed for her ignorance. She hated people who used words unknown toher.

In India, when a man dies he is burned, instead of buried, and his wife always climbs on thefuneral pyre and is burned with him.

How dreadful! Why do they do it? Dont the police do anything about it?

Of course not. A wife who didnt burn herself would be a social outcast. All the worthy Hindumatrons would talk about her for not behaving as a well-bred lady shouldprecisely as thoseworthy matrons in the corner would talk about you, should you appear tonight in a red dress andlead a reel. Personally, I think suttee much more merciful than our charming Southern custom ofburying widows alive!

How dare you say Im buried alive!

How closely women clutch the very chains that bind them! You think the Hindu custombarbarousbut would you have had the courage to appear here tonight if the Confederacy hadntneeded you?

Arguments of this character were always confusing to Scarlett. His were doubly confusingbecause she had a vague idea there was truth in them. But now was the time to squelch him.

Of course, I wouldnt have come. It would have beenwell, disrespectful toit would haveseemed as if I hadnt lov

His eyes waited on her words, cynical amusement in them, and she could not go on. He knewshe hadnt loved Charlie and he wouldnt let her pretend to the nice polite sentiments that sheshould express. What a terrible, terrible thing it was to have to do with a man who wasnt agentleman. A gentleman always appeared to believe a lady even when he knew she was lying. Thatwas Southern chivalry. A gentleman always obeyed the rules and said the correct things and madelife easier for a lady. But this man seemed not to care for rules and evidently enjoyed talking ofthings no one ever talked about.

I am waiting breathlessly.

I think you are horrid, she said, helplessly, dropping her eyes.

He leaned down across the counter until his mouth was near her ear and hissed, in a verycreditable imitation of the stage villains who appeared infrequently at the Athenaeum Hall: Fearnot, fair lady! Your guilty secret is safe with me!

Oh, she whispered, feverishly, how can you say such things!

I only thought to ease your mind. What would you have me say? Be mine, beautiful female, orI will reveal all?

She met his eyes unwillingly and saw they were as teasing as a small boys. Suddenly she laughed. It was such a silly situation, after all. He laughed too, and so loudly that several of thechaperons in the corner looked their way. Observing how good a time Charles Hamiltons widowappeared to be having with a perfect stranger, they put their heads together disapprovingly.

There was a roll of drums and many voices cried Sh! as Dr. Meade mounted the platform andspread out his arms for quiet.

We must all give grateful thanks to the charming ladies whose indefatigable and patrioticefforts have made this bazaar not only a pecuniary success, he began, but have transformed thisrough hall into a bower of loveliness, a fit garden for the charming rosebuds I see about me.

Everyone clapped approvingly.

The ladies have given their best, not only of their time but of the labor of their hands, and thesebeautiful objects in the booths are doubly beautiful, made as they are by the fair hands of ourcharming Southern women.

There were more shouts of approval, and Rhett Butler who had been lounging negligentlyagainst the counter at Scarletts side whispered: Pompous goat, isnt he?

Startled, at first horrified, at this lese majesty toward Atlantas most beloved citizen, she staredreprovingly at him. But the doctor did look like a goat with his gray chin whiskers wagging awayat a great rate, and with difficulty she stifled a giggle.

But these things are not enough. The good ladies of the hospital committee, whose cool handshave soothed many a suffering brow and brought back from the jaws of death our brave menwounded in the bravest of all Causes, know our needs. I will not enumerate them. We must havemore money to buy medical supplies from England, and we have with us tonight the intrepidcaptain who has so successfully run the blockade for a year and who will run it again to bring usthe drugs we need. Captain Rhett Butler!

Though caught unawares, the blockader made a graceful bowtoo graceful, thought Scarlett,trying to analyze it. It was almost as if he overdid his courtesy because his contempt for everybodypresent was so great. There was a loud burst of applause as he bowed and a craning of necks fromthe ladies in the corner. So that was who poor Charles Hamiltons widow was carrying on with!

And Charlie hardly dead a year!

We need more gold and I am asking you. for it the doctor continued. I am asking a sacrificebut a sacrifice so small compared with the sacrifices our gallant men in gray are making that it willseem laughably small. Ladies, I want your jewelry. I want your jewelry? No, the Confederacywants your jewelry, the Confederacy calls for it and I know no one will hold back. How fair a gemgleams on a lovely wrist! How beautifully gold brooches glitter on the bosoms of our patrioticwomen! But how much more beautiful is sacrifice than all the gold and gems of the Ind. The goldwill be melted and the stones sold and the money used to buy drugs and other medical supplies.

Ladies, there will pass among you two of our gallant wounded, with baskets and But the rest ofhis speech was lost in the storm and tumult of clapping hands and cheering voices.

Scarletts first thought was one of deep thankfulness that mourning forbade her wearing her precious earbobs arid the heavy gold chain that had been Grandma Robillards and the gold andblack enameled bracelets and the garnet brooch. She saw the little Zouave, a split-oak basket overhis unwounded arm, making the rounds of the crowd on her side of the hall and saw women, oldand young, laughing, eager, tugging at bracelets, squealing in pretended pain as earrings camefrom pierced flesh, helping each other undo stiff necklace clasps, unpinning brooches frombosoms. There was a steady little dink-clink of metal on metal and cries of Waitwait! Ive got itunfastened now. There! Maybelle Merriwether was pulling off her lovely twin bracelets fromabove and below her elbows. Fanny Elsing, crying Mamma, may I? was tearing from her curlsthe seed-pearl ornament set in heavy gold which had been in the family for generations. As eachoffering went into the basket, there was applause and cheering.

The grinning little man was coming to their booth now, his basket heavy on his arm, and as hepassed Rhett Butler a handsome gold cigar case was thrown carelessly into the basket. When hecame to Scarlett and rested his basket upon the counter, she shook her head throwing wide herhands to show that she had nothing to give. It was embarrassing to

Chapter 10

OVER THE WAFFLES next morning, Pittypat was lachrymose, Melanie was silent and Scarlettdefiant.

I dont care if they do talk. Ill bet I made more money for the hospital than any girl theremore than all the messy old stuff we sold, too.

Oh, dear, what does the money matter? wailed Pittypat, wringing her hands. I just couldntbelieve my eyes, and poor Charlie hardly dead a year. ... And that awful Captain Butler, makingyou so conspicuous, and hes a terrible, terrible person, Scarlett. Mrs. Whitings cousin, Mrs.

Coleman, whose husband came from Charleston, told me about him. Hes the black sheep of alovely familyoh, how could any of the Butlers ever turn out anything like him? He isnt receivedin Charleston and he has the fastest reputation and there was something about a girlsomething sobad Mrs. Coleman didnt even know what it was

Oh, I cant believe hes that bad, said Melly gently. He seemed a perfect gentleman and whenyou think how brave hes been, running the blockade

He isnt brave, said Scarlett perversely, pouring half a pitcher of syrup over her waffles. Hejust does it for money. He told me so. He doesnt care anything about the Confederacy and he sayswere going to get licked. But he dances divinely.

Her audience was speechless with horror.

Im tired of sitting at home and Im not going to do it any longer. If they all talked about meabout last night, then my reputation is already gone and it wont matter what else they say.

It did not occur to her that the idea was Rhett Butlers. It came so patly and fitted so well withwhat she was thinking.

Oh! What will your mother say when she hears? What will she think of me?

A cold qualm of guilt assailed Scarlett at the thought of Ellens consternation, should she everlearn of her daughters scandalous conduct. But she took heart at the thought of the twenty-fivemiles between Atlanta and Tara. Miss Pitty certainly wouldnt tell Ellen. It would put her in such abad light as a chaperon. And if Pitty didnt tattle, she was safe.

I think said Pitty, yes, I think Id better write Henry a letter about itmuch as I hate itbut hes our only male relative, and make him go speak reprovingly to Captain Butler Oh, dear,if Charlie were only alive You must never, never speak to that man again, Scarlett.

Melanie had been sitting quietly, her hands in her lap, her waffles cooling on her plate. She aroseand, coming behind Scarlett, put her arms about her neck.

Darling, she said, dont you get upset. I understand and it was a brave thing you did last nightand its going to help the hospital a lot. And if anybody dares say one little word about you, Illtend to them. ... Aunt Pitty, dont cry. It has been hard on Scarlett, not going anywhere. Shes just ababy. Her fingers played in Scarletts black hair. And maybe wed all be better off if we went outoccasionally to parties. Maybe weve been very selfish, staying here with our grief. War timesarent like other times. When I think of all the soldiers in town who are far from home and havent any friends to call on at nightand the ones in the hospital who are well enough to be out of bedand not well enough to go back in the army Why, we have been selfish. We ought to have threeconvalescents in our house this minute, like everybody else, and some of the soldiers out to dinnerevery Sunday. There, Scarlett, dont you fret. People wont talk when they understand. We knowyou loved Charlie.

Scarlett was far from fretting and Melanies soft hands in her hair were irritating. She wanted tojerk her head away and say Oh, fiddle-dee-dee! for the warming memory was still on her of howthe Home Guard and the militia and the soldiers from the hospital had fought for her dances lastnight. Of all the people in the world, she didnt want Melly for a defender. She could defendherself, thank you, and if the old cats wanted to squallwell, she could get along without the oldcats. There were too many nice officers in the world for her to bother about what old women said.

Pittypat was dabbing at her eyes under Melanies soothing words when Prissy entered with abulky letter.

Fer you, Miss Melly. A lil nigger boy brung it.

For me? said Melly, wondering, as she ripped open the envelope.

Scarlett was making headway with her waffles and so noticed nothing until she heard a burst oftears from Melly and, looking up, saw Aunt Pittypats hand go to her heart.

Ashleys dead! screamed Pittypat, throwing her head back and letting her arms go limp.

Oh, my God! cried Scarlett, her blood turning to ice water.

No! No! cried Melanie. Quick! Her smelling salts, Scarlett! There, there, honey, do you feelbetter? Breathe deep. No, its not Ashley. Im so sorry I scared you. I was crying because Im sohappy, and suddenly she opened her clenched palm and pressed some object that was in it to herlips. Im so happy, and burst into tears again.

Scarlett caught a fleeting glimpse and saw that it was a broad gold ring.

Read it, said Melly, pointing to the letter on the floor. Oh, how sweet, how kind, he is!

Scarlett, bewildered, picked up the single sheet and saw written in a black, bold hand: TheConfederacy may need the lifeblood of its men but not yet does it demand the hearts blood of itswomen. Accept, dear Madam, this token of my reverence for your courage and do not think thatyour sacrifice has been in vain, for this ring has been redeemed at ten times its value. CaptainRhett Butler.

Melanie slipped the ring on her finger and looked at it lovingly.

I told you he was a gentleman, didnt I? she said turning to Pittypat her smile bright throughthe teardrops on her face. No one but a gentleman of refinement and thoughtfulness would everhave thought how it broke my heart to Ill send my gold chain instead. Aunt Pittypat, you mustwrite him a note and invite him to Sunday dinner so I can thank him.

In the excitement, neither of the others seemed to have thought that Captain Butler had notreturned Scarletts ring, too. But she thought of it, annoyed. And she knew it had not been CaptainButlers refinement that had prompted so gallant a gesture. It was that he intended to be asked into Pittypats house and knew unerringly how to get the invitation.

I was greatly disturbed to hear of your recent conduct, ran Ellens letter and Scarlett, who wasreading it at the table, scowled. Bad news certainly traveled swiftly. She had often heard inCharleston and Savannah that Atlanta people gossiped more and meddled in other peoplesbusiness more than any other people in the South, and now she believed it. The bazaar had takenplace Monday night and today was only Thursday. Which of the old cats had taken it upon herselfto write Ellen? For a moment she suspected Pittypat but immediately abandoned that thought. PoorPittypat had been quaking in her number-three shoes for fear of being blamed for Scarlettsforward conduct and would be the last to notify Ellen of her own inadequate chaperonage.

Probably it was Mrs. Merriwether.

It is difficult for me to believe that you could so forget yourself and your rearing. I will passover the impropriety of your appearing publicly while in mourning, realizing your warm desire tobe of assistance to the hospital. But to dance, and with such a man as Captain Butler! I have heardmuch of him (as who has not?) and Pauline wrote me only last week that he is a man of bad reputeand not even received by his own family in Charleston, except of course by his heartbrokenmother. He is a thoroughly bad character who would take advantage of your youth and innocenceto make you conspicuous and publicly disgrace you and your family. How could Miss Pittypathave so neglected her duty to you?

Scarlett looked across the table at her aunt The old lady had recognized Ellens handwriting andher fat little mouth was pursed in a frightened way, like a baby who fears a scolding and hopes toward it off by tears.

I am heartbroken to think that you could so soon forget your rearing. I have thought of callingyou home immediately but will leave that to your fathers discretion. He will be in Atlanta Fridayto speak with Captain Butler and to escort you home. I fear he will be severe with you despite mypleadings. I hope and pray it was only youth and thoughtlessness that prompted such forwardconduct. No one can wish to serve our Cause more than I, and I wish my daughters to feel thesame way, but to disgrace

There was more in the same vein but Scarlett did not finish it. For once, she was thoroughlyfrightened. She did not feel reckless and defiant now. She felt as young and guilty as when she wasten and had thrown a buttered biscuit at Suellen at the table. To think of her gentle motherreproving her so harshly and her father coming to town to talk to Captain Butler. The realseriousness of the matter grew on her. Gerald was going to be severe. This was one time when sheknew she couldnt wiggle out of her punishment by sitting on his knee and being sweet and pert.

Notnot bad news? quavered PittypatPa is coming tomorrow and hes going to land on me like a duck on a June bug, answeredScarlett dolorously.

Prissy, find my salts, fluttered Pittypat, pushing back her chair from her half-eaten meal. IIfeel faint.

Deys in yo skirt pocket, said Prissy, who had been hovering behind Scarlett, enjoying the sensational drama. Mist Gerald in a temper was always exciting, providing his temper was notdirected at her kinky head. Pitty fumbled at her skirt and held the vial to her nose.

You all must stand by me and not leave me alone with him for one minute, cried ScarlettHes so fond of you both, and if you are with me he cant fuss at me.

I couldnt said Pittypat weakly, rising to her feet II feel ill. I must go lie down. I shall liedown all day tomorrow. You must give him my excuses.

Coward! thought Scarlett glowering at her.

Melly rallied to the defense, though white and frightened at the prospect of facing the fire-eatingMr. OHara. IllIll help you explain how you did it for the hospital. Surely hell understand.

No, he wont, said Scarlett. And oh, I shall die if I have to go back to Tara in disgrace, likeMother threatens!

Oh, you cant go home, cried Pittypat bursting into tears. If you did I should be forcedyes,forced to ask Henry to come live with us, and you know I just couldnt live with Henry. Im sonervous with just Melly in the house at night, with so many strange men in town. Youre so brave Idont mind being here without a man!

Oh, he couldnt take you to Tara! said Melly, looking as if she too would cry in a moment.

This is your home now. What would we ever do without you?

Youd be glad to do without me if you knew what I really think of you, thought Scarlettsourly, wishing there were some other person than Melanie to help ward off Geralds wrath. It wassickening to be defended by someone you disliked so much.

Perhaps we should recall our invitation to Captain Butler began PittypatOh, we couldnt! It would be the height of rudeness! cried Melly, distressed.

Help me to bed. Im going to be ill, moaned Pittypat. Oh, Scarlett, how could you havebrought this on me?

Pittypat was ill and in her bed when Gerald arrived the next afternoon. She sent many messagesof regret to him from behind her closed door and left the two frightened girls to preside over thesupper table. Gerald was ominously silent although he kissed Scarlett and pinched Melanies cheekapprovingly and called her Cousin Melly. Scarlett would have infinitely preferred bellowingoaths and accusations. True to her promise, Melanie clung to Scarletts skirts like a small rustlingshadow and Gerald was too much of a gentleman to upbraid his daughter in front of her. Scarletthad to admit that Melanie carried off things very well, acting as if she knew nothing was amiss,and she actually succeeded in engaging Gerald in conversation, once the supper had been served.

I want to know all about the County, she said, beaming upon him. India and Honey are suchpoor correspondents, and I know you know everything that goes on down there. Do tell us aboutJoe Fontaines wedding.

Gerald warmed to the flattery and said that the wedding had been a quiet affair, not like yougirls had, for Joe had only a few days furlough. Sally, the little Munroe chit, looked very pretty.

No, he couldnt recall what she wore but he did hear that she didnt have a second-day dress.

She didnt! exclaimed the girls, scandalized.

Sure, because she didnt have a second day, Gerald explained and bawled with laughter beforerecalling that perhaps such remarks were not fit for female ears. Scarletts spirits soared at hislaugh and she blessed Melanies tact.

Back Joe went to Virginia the next day, Gerald added hastily. There was no visiting aboutand dancing afterwards. The Tarleton twins are home.

We heard that. Have they recovered?

They werent badly wounded. Stuart had it in the knee and a minie ball went through Brentsshoulder. You had it, too, that they were mentioned in dispatches for bravery?

No! Tell us!

Hare brainedboth of them. Im believing theres Irish in them, said Gerald complacently. Iforget what they did, but Brent is a lieutenant now.

Scarlett felt pleased at hearing of their exploits, pleased in a proprietary manner. Once a manhad been her beau, she never lost the conviction that he belonged to her, and all his good deedsredounded to her credit.

And Ive news thatll be holding the both of you, said Gerald. Theyre saying Stu is courtingat Twelve Oaks again.

Honey or India? questioned Melly excitedly, while Scarlett stared almost indignantly.

Oh, Miss India, to be sure. Didnt she have him fast till this baggage of mine winked at him?

Oh, said Melly, somewhat embarrassed at Geralds outspokenness.

And more than that, young Brent has taken to hanging about Tara. Now!

Scarlett could not speak. The defection of her beaux was almost insulting. Especially when sherecalled how wildly both the twins had acted when she told them she was going to marry Charles.

Stuart had even threatened to shoot Charles, or Scarlett, or himself, or all three. It had been mostexciting.

Suellen? questioned Melly, breaking into a pleased smile. But I thought Mr. Kennedy

Oh, him? said Gerald. Frank Kennedy still pussyfoots about, afraid of his shadow, and Ill beasking him his intentions soon if he doesnt speak up. No, tis me baby.

Carreen?

Shes nothing but a child! said Scarlett sharply, finding her tongue.

Shes little more than a year younger than you were, Miss, when you were married, retortedGerald. Is it youre grudging your old beau to your sister?

Melly blushed, unaccustomed to such frankness, and signaled Peter to bring in the sweet potatopie. Frantically she cast about in her mind for some other topic of conversation which would not beso personal but which would divert Mr. OHara from the purpose of his trip. She could think ofnothing but, once started, Gerald needed no stimulus other than an audience. He talked on about the thievery of the commissary department which every month increased its demands, the knavishstupidity of Jefferson Davis and the blackguardery of the Irish who were being enticed into theYankee army by bounty money.

When the wine was on the table and the two girls rose to leave him, Gerald cocked a severe eyeat his daughter from under frowning brows and commanded her presence alone for a few minutes.

Scarlett cast a despairing glance at Melly, who twisted her handkerchief helplessly and went out,softly pulling the sliding doors together.

How now, Missy! bawled Gerald, pouring himself a glass of port.  Tis a fine way to act! Is itanother husband youre trying to catch and you so fresh a widow?

Not so loud, Pa, the servants

They know already, to be sure, and everybody knows of our disgrace. And your poor mothertaking to her bed with it and me not able to hold up me head. Tis shameful. No, Puss, you neednot think to get around me with tears this time, he said hastily and with some panic in his voice asScarletts lids began to bat and her mouth to screw up. I know you. Youd be flirting at the wakeof your husband. Dont cry. There, Ill be saying no more tonight, for Im going to see this fineCaptain Butler who makes so light of me daughters reputation. But in the morning There now,dont cry. Twill do you no good at all, at all. Tis firm that I am and back to Tara youll be goingtomorrow before youre disgracing the lot of us again. Dont cry, pet. Look what Ive brought you!

Isnt that a pretty present? See, look! How could you be putting so much trouble on me, bringingme all the way up here when tis a busy man I am? Dont cry!

Melanie and Pittypat had gone to sleep hours before, but Scarlett lay awake in the warmdarkness, her heart heavy and frightened in her breast. To leave Atlanta when life had just begunagain and go home and face Ellen! She would rather die than face her mother. She wished she weredead, this very minute, then everyone would be sorry they had been so hateful. She turned andtossed on the hot pillow until a noise far up the quiet street reached her ears. It was an oddlyfamiliar noise, blurred and indistinct though it was. She slipped out of bed and went to the window.

The street with its over-arching trees was softly, deeply black under a dim star-studded sky. Thenoise came closer, the sound of wheels, the plod of a horses hooves and voices. And suddenly shegrinned for, as a voice thick with brogue and whisky came to her, raised in Peg in a Low-backedCar, she knew. This might not be Jonesboro on Court Day, but Gerald was coming home in thesame condition.

She saw the dark bulk of a buggy stop in front of the house and indistinct figures alight.

Someone was with him. Two figures paused at the gate and she heard the click of the latch andGeralds voice came plain.

Now Ill be giving you the Lament for Robert Emmet. Tis a song you should be knowing, melad. Ill teach It to you.

Id like to learn it, replied his companion, a hint of buried laughter in his flat drawling voice.

But not now, Mr. OHara.

Oh, my God, its that hateful Butler man! thought Scarlett, at first annoyed. Then she took heart. At least they hadnt shot each other. And they must be on amicable terms to be coming hometogether at this hour and in this condition.

Sing it I will and listen you will or Ill be shooting you for the Orangeman you are.

Not OrangemanCharlestonian.

Tis no better. Tis worse. I have two sister-in-laws in Charleston and I know.

Is he going to tell the whole neighborhood? thought Scarlett panic-stricken, reaching for herwrapper. But what could she do? She couldnt go downstairs at this hour of the night and drag herfather in from the street.

With no further warning, Gerald, who was hanging on the gate, threw back his head and beganthe Lament, in a roaring bass. Scarlett rested her elbows on the window sill and listened,grinning unwillingly. It would be a beautiful song, if only her father could carry a tune. It was oneof her favorite songs and, for a moment, she followed the fine melancholy of those versesbeginning:

She is far from the land where her young hero sleepsAnd lovers are round her sighing.

The song went on and she heard stirrings in Pittypats and Mellys rooms. Poor things, theydcertainly be upset. They were not used to full-blooded males like Gerald. When the song hadfinished, two forms merged into one, came up the walk and mounted the steps. A discreet knocksounded at the door.

I suppose I must go down, thought Scarlett. After all hes my father and poor Pitty would diebefore shed go. Besides, she didnt want the servants to see Gerald in his present condition. Andif Peter tried to put him to bed, he might get unruly. Pork was the only one who knew how tohandle him.

She pinned the wrapper close about her throat, lit her bedside candle and hurried down the darkstairs into the front hall. Setting the candle on the stand, she unlocked the door and in the waveringlight she saw Rhett Butler, not a ruffle disarranged, supporting her small, thickset father. TheLament had evidently been Geralds swan song for he was frankly hanging onto his companionsarm. His hat was gone, his crisp long hair was tumbled in a white mane, his cravat was under oneear, and there were liquor stains down his shirt bosom.

Your father, I believe? said Captain Butler, his eyes amused in his swarthy face. He took inher dishabille in one glance that seemed to penetrate through her wrapper.

Bring him in, she said shortly, embarrassed at her attire, infuriated at Gerald for putting her ina position where this man could laugh at her.

Rhett propelled Gerald forward. Shall I help you take him upstairs? You cannot manage him.

Hes quite heavy.

Her mouth fell open with horror at the audacity of his proposal. Just imagine what Pittypat andMelly cowering in their beds would think, should Captain Butler come upstairs!

Mother of God, no! In here, in the parlor on that settee.

The suttee, did you say?

Ill thank you to keep a civil tongue in your head. Here. Now lay him down.

Shall I take off his boots?

No. Hes slept in them before.

She could have bitten off her tongue for that slip, for he laughed softly as he crossed Geraldslegs.

Please go, now.

He walked out into the dim hall and picked up the hat he had dropped on the doorsill.

I will be seeing you Sunday at dinner, he said and went out, closing the door noiselesslybehind him.

Scarlett at five-thirty, before the servants had in from the back yard to start breakfast,andsl(arose) ipped down the steps to the quiet lower floor.(come) Gerald was awake, sitting on thesofa, his hands gripping his bullet head as if he wished to crush it between his palms. He looked upfurtively as she entered. The pain of moving his eyes was too excruciating to be borne and hegroaned.

Wurra the day!

Its a fine way youve acted, Pa, she began in a furious whisper. Coming home at such anhour and waking all the neighbors with your singing.

I sang?

Sang! You woke the echoes singing the Lament.

Tis nothing Im remembering.

The neighbors will remember it till their dying day and so will Miss Pittypat and Melanie.

Mother of Sorrows, moaned Gerald, moving a thickly furred tongue around parched lips. Tis little Im remembering after the game started.

Game?

That laddybuck Butler bragged that he was the best poker player in

How much did you lose?

Why, I won, naturally. A drink or two helps me game.

Look in your wallet.

As if every movement was agony, Gerald removed his wallet from his coat and opened it. It wasempty and he looked at it in forlorn bewilderment.

Five hundred dollars, he said. And twas to buy things from the blockaders for Mrs. OHara,and now not even fare left to Tara.

As she looked indignantly at the empty purse, an idea took form in Scarletts mind and grewswiftly.

Ill not be holding up my head in this town, she began. Youve disgraced us all.

Hold your tongue, Puss. Can you not see me head is bursting?

Coming home drunk with a man like Captain Butler, and singing at the top of your lungs foreveryone to hear and losing all that money.

The man is too clever with cards to be a gentleman. He

What will Mother say when she hears?

He looked up in sudden anguished apprehension.

You wouldnt be telling your mother a word and upsetting her, now would you?

Scarlett said nothing but pursed her lips.

Think now how twould hurt her and her so gentle.

And to think, Pa, that you said only last night I had disgraced the family! Me, with my poorlittle dance to make money for the soldiers. Oh, I could cry.

Well, dont, pleaded Gerald.  Twould be more than me poor head could stand and sure tisbursting now.

And you said that I

Now Puss, now Puss, dont you be hurt at what your poor old father said and him not meaninga thing and not understanding a thing! Sure, youre a fine well-meaning girl, Im sure.

And wanting to take me home in disgrace.

Ah, darling, I wouldnt be doing that. Twas to tease you. You wont be mentioning the moneyto your mother and her in a flutter about expenses already?

No, said Scarlett frankly, I wont, if youll let me stay here and if youll tell Mother thattwas nothing but a lot of gossip from old cats.

Gerald looked mournfully at his daughter.

Tis blackmail, no less.

And last night was a scandal, no less.

Well, he began wheedlingly, well be forgetting all that. And do you think a fine pretty ladylike Miss Pittypat would be having any brandy in the house? The hair of the dog

Scarlett turned and tiptoed through the silent hall into the dining room to get the brandy bottlethat she and Melly privately called the swoon bottle because Pittypat always took a sip from itwhen her fluttering heart made her faintor seem to faint. Triumph was written on her face and notrace of shame for her unfilial treatment of Gerald. Now Ellen would be soothed with lies if any other busybody wrote her. Now she could stay in Atlanta. Now she could do almost as she pleased,Pittypat being the weak vessel that she was. She unlocked the cellaret and stood for a moment withthe bottle and glass pressed to her bosom.

She saw a long vista of picnics by the bubbling waters of Peachtree Creek and barbecues atStone Mountain, receptions and balls, afternoon danceables, buggy rides and Sunday-night buffetsuppers. She would be there, right in the heart of things, right in the center of a crowd of men. Andmen fell in love so easily, after you did little things for them at the hospital. She wouldnt mind thehospital so much now. Men were so easily stirred when they had been ill. They fell into a clevergirls hand just like the ripe peaches at Tara when the trees were gently shaken.

She went back toward her father with me reviving liquor, thanking Heaven that the famousOHara head had not been able to survive last nights bout and wondering suddenly if Rhett Butlerhad had anything to do with that.

Chapter 11

ON AN AFTERNOON of the following week, Scarlett came home from the hospital weary andindignant. She tired from standing on her feet all morning and irritable because Mrs. Merriwetherhadsco(was) lded her sharply for sitting on a soldiers bed while she dressed his woundedarm. Aunt Pitty and Melanie, bonneted in their best were on the porch with Wade and Prissy, readyfor their weekly round of calls. Scarlett asked to be excused from accompanying them and wentupstairs to her room.

When the last sound of carriage wheels had died away and she knew the family was safely outof sight she slipped quietly into Melanies room and turned the key in the lock. It was a prim,virginal little room and it lay still and warm in the slanting rays of the four-oclock sun. The floorswere glistening and bare except for a few bright rag rugs, and the white walls unornamented savefor one corner which Melanie had fitted up as a shrine.

Here, under a draped Confederate flag, hung the gold-hilted saber that Melanies father hadcarried in the Mexican War, the same saber Charles had worn away to war. Charles sash and pistolbelt hung there too, with his revolver in the holster. Between the saber and the pistol was adaguerreotype of Charles himself, very stiff and proud in his gray uniform, his great brown eyesshining out of the frame and a shy smile on his lips.

Scarlett did not even glance at the picture but went unhesitatingly across the room to the squarerosewood writing box that stood on the table beside the narrow bed. From it she took a pack ofletters tied together with a blue ribbon, addressed in Ashleys hand to Melanie. On the top was theletter which had come that morning and this one she opened.

When Scarlett first began secretly reading these letters, she had been so stricken of conscienceand so fearful of discovery she could hardly open the envelopes for trembling. Now, her never-tooscrupuloussense of honor was dulled by repetition of the offense and even fear of discovery hadsubsided. Occasionally, she thought with a sulking heart, What would Mother say if she knew?

She knew Ellen would rather see her dead than know her guilty of such dishonor. This had worriedScarlett at first, for she still wanted to be like her mother in every respect. But the temptation to read the letters was too great and she put the thought of Ellen out of her mind. She had becomeadept at putting unpleasant thoughts out of her mind these days. She had learned to say, I wontthink of this or that bothersome thought now. Ill think about it tomorrow. Generally whentomorrow came, the thought either did not occur at all or it was so attenuated by the delay it wasnot very troublesome. So the matter of Ashleys letters did not lie very heavily on her conscience.

Melanie was always generous with the letters, reading parts of them aloud to Aunt Pitty andScarlett. But it was the part she did not read that tormented Scarlett, that drove her to surreptitiousreading of her sister-in-laws mail. She had to know if Ashley had come to love his wife sincemarrying her. She had to know if he even pretended to love her. Did he address tender endearmentsto her? What sentiments did he express and with what warmth?

She carefully smoothed out the letter.

Ashleys small even writing leaped up at her as she read, My dear wife, and she breathed inrelief. He wasnt calling Melanie Darling or Sweetheart yet.

My Dear wife: You write me saying you are alarmed lest I be concealing my real thoughts fromyou and you ask me what is occupying my mind these days

Mother of God! thought Scarlett, in a panic of guilt  Concealing his real thoughts. CanMelly have read his mind? Or my mind? Does she suspect that he and I

Her hands trembled with fright as she held the letter closer, but as she read the next paragraphshe relaxed.

Dear Wife, if I have concealed aught from you it is because I did not wish to lay a burden onyour shoulders, to add to your worries for my physical safety with those of my mental turmoil. ButI can keep nothing from you, for you know me too well. Do not be alarmed. I have no wound. Ihave not been ill. I have enough to eat and occasionally a bed to sleep in. A soldier can ask for nomore. But, Melanie, heavy thoughts lie on my heart and I will open my heart to you.

These summer nights I lie awake, long after the camp is sleeping, and I look up at the stars and,over and over, I wonder, Why are you here, Ashley Wilkes? What are you fighting for?

Not for honor and glory, certainly. War is a dirty business and I do not like dirt. I am not asoldier and I have no desire to seek the bubble reputation even in the cannons mouth. Yet, here Iam at the warswhom God never intended to be other than a studious country gentleman. For,Melanie, bugles do not stir my blood nor drums entice my feet and I see too clearly that we havebeen betrayed, betrayed by our arrogant Southern selves, believing that one of us could whip adozen Yankees, believing that King Cotton could rule the world. Betrayed, too, by words and catchphrases, prejudices and hatreds coming from the mouths of those highly placed, those men whomwe respected and reveredKing Cotton, Slavery, States Rights, Damn Yankees.

And so when I lie on my blanket and look up at the stars and say What are you fighting for?

think of States Rights and cotton and the darkies and the Yankees whom we have been bred tohate, and I know that none of these is the reason why I am fighting. Instead, I see Twelve Oaks andremember how the moonlight slants across the white columns, and the unearthly way themagnolias look, opening under the moon, and how the climbing roses make the side porch shadyeven at the hottest noon. And I see Mother, sewing there, as she did when I was a little boy. And I hear the darkies coming home across the fields at dusk, tired and singing and ready for supper, andthe sound of the windlass as the bucket goes down into the cool well. And theres the long viewdown the road to the river, across the cotton fields, and the mist rising from the bottom lands in thetwilight. And that is why Im here who have no love of death or misery or glory and no hatred foranyone. Perhaps that is what is called patriotism, love of home and country. But Melanie, it goesdeeper than that. For, Melanie, these things I have named are but the symbols of the thing forwhich I risk my life, symbols of the kind of life I love. For I am fighting for the old days, the oldways I love so much but which, I fear, are now gone forever, no matter how the die may fall. For,win or lose, we lose just the same.

If we win this war and have the Cotton Kingdom of our dreams, we still have lost, for we willbecome a different people and the old quiet ways will go. The world will be at our doors clamoringfor cotton and we can command our own price. Then, I fear, we will become like the Yankees, atwhose money-making activities, acquisitiveness and commercialism we now sneer. And if we lose,Melanie, if we lose!

I am not afraid of danger or capture or wounds or even death, if death must come, but I do fearthat once this war is over, we will never get back to the old times. And I belong in those old times.

I do not belong in this mad present of killing and I fear I will not fit into any future, try though Imay. Nor will you, my dear, for you and I are of the same blood. I do not know what the future willbring, but it cannot be as beautiful or as satisfying as the past.

I lie and look at the boys sleeping near me and I wonder if the twins or Alex or Cade thinkthese same thoughts. I wonder if they know they are fighting for a Cause that was lost the minutethe first shot was fired, for our Cause is really our own way of living and that is gone already. But Ido not think they think these things and they are lucky.

I had not thought of this for us when I asked you to marry me. I had thought of life going on atTwelve Oaks as it had always done, peacefully, easily, unchanging. We are alike, Melanie, lovingthe same quiet things, and I saw before us a long stretch of uneventful years in which to read, hearmusic and dream. But not this! Never this! That this could happen to us all, this wrecking of oldways, this bloody slaughter and hate! Melanie, nothing is worth itStates Rights, nor slaves, norcotton. Nothing is worth what is happening to us now and what may happen, for if the Yankeeswhip us the future will be one of incredible horror. And, my dear, they may yet whip us.

I should not write those words. I should not even think them. But you have asked me what wasin my heart, and the fear of defeat is there. Do you remember at the barbecue, the day ourengagement was announced, that a man named Butler, a Charlestonian by his accent, nearly causeda fight by his remarks about the ignorance of Southerners? Do you recall how the twins wanted toshoot him because he said we had few foundries and factories, mills and ships, arsenals andmachine shops? Do you recall how he said the Yankee fleet could bottle us up so tightly we couldnot ship out our cotton? He was right. We are fighting the Yankees new rifles with RevolutionaryWar muskets, and soon the blockade will be too tight for even medical supplies to slip in. Weshould have paid heed to cynics like Butler who knew, instead of statesmen who feltand talked.

He said, in effect, that the South had nothing with which to wage war but cotton and arrogance.

Our cotton is worthless and what he called arrogance is all that is left. But I call that arrogancematchless courage. If

But Scarlett carefully folded up the letter without finishing it and thrust it back into theenvelope, too bored to read further. Besides, the tone of the letter vaguely depressed her with itsfoolish talk of defeat. After all, she wasnt reading Melanies mail to learn Ashleys puzzling anduninteresting ideas. She had had to listen to enough of them when he sat on the porch at Tara indays gone by.

All she wanted to know was whether he wrote impassioned letters to his wife. So far he had not.

She had read every letter in the writing box and there was nothing in any one of them that a brothermight not have written to a sister. They were affectionate, humorous, discursive, but not the lettersof a lover. Scarlett had received too many ardent love letters herself not to recognize the authenticnote of passion when she saw it. And that note was missing. As always after her secret readings, afeeling of smug satisfaction enveloped her, for she felt certain that Ashley still loved her. Andalways she wondered sneeringly why Melanie did not realize that Ashley only loved her as afriend. Melanie evidently found nothing lacking in her husbands messages but Melanie had had noother mans love letters with which to compare Ashleys

He writes such crazy letters, Scarlett thought If ever any husband of mine wrote me suchtwaddle-twaddle, hed certainly hear from me! Why, even Charlie wrote better letters than these.

She flipped back the edges of the letters, looking at the dates, remembering their contents. Inthem there were no fine descriptive pages of bivouacs and charges such as Darcy Meade wrote hisparents or poor Dallas McLure had written his old-maid sisters, Misses Faith and Hope. TheMeades and McLures proudly read these letters all over the neighborhood, and Scarlett hadfrequently felt a secret shame that Melanie had no such letters from Ashley to read aloud at sewingcircles.

It was as though when writing Melanie, Ashley tried to ignore the war altogether, and sought todraw about the two of them a magic circle of timelessness, shutting out everything that hadhappened since Fort Sumter was the news of the day. It was almost as if he were trying to believethere wasnt any war. He wrote of books which he and Melanie had read and songs they had sung,of old friends they knew and places he had visited on his Grand Tour. Through the letters ran awistful yearning to be back home at Twelve Oaks, and for pages he wrote of the hunting and thelong rides through the still forest paths under frosty autumn stars, the barbecues, the fish fries, thequiet of moonlight nights and the serene charm of the old house.

She thought of his words in the letter she had just read: Not this! Never this! and they seemedto cry of a tormented soul facing something he could not face, yet must face. It puzzled her for, ifhe was not afraid of wounds and death, what was it he feared? Unanalytical, she struggled with thecomplex thought.

The war disturbs him and hehe doesnt like things that disturb him. ... Me, for instance. ... Heloved me but he was afraid to marry me becausefor fear Id upset his way of thinking and living.

No, it wasnt exactly that he was afraid. Ashley isnt a coward. He couldnt be when hes beenmentioned in dispatches and when Colonel Sloan wrote that letter to Melly all about his gallantconduct in leading the charge. Once hes made up his mind to do something, no one could bebraver or more determined but He lives inside his head instead of outside in the world and hehates to come out into the world and Oh, I dont know what it is! If Id just understood this one thing about him years ago, I know hed have married me.

She stood for a moment holding the letters to her breast, thinking longingly of Ashley. Heremotions toward him had not changed since the day when she first fell in love with him. Theywere the same emotions that struck her speechless that day when she was fourteen years old andshe had stood on the porch of Tara and seen Ashley ride up smiling, his hair shining silver in themorning sun. Her love was still a young girls adoration for a man she could not understand, a manwho possessed all the qualities she did not own but which she admired. He was still a young girlsdream of the Perfect Knight and her dream asked no more than acknowledgment of his love, wentno further than hopes of a kiss.

After reading the letters, she felt certain he did love her, Scarlett, even though he had marriedMelanie, and that certainty was almost all that she desired. She was still that young and untouched.

Had Charles with his fumbling awkwardness and his embarrassed intimacies tapped any of thedeep vein of passionate feeling within her, her dreams of Ashley would not be ending with a kiss.

But those few moonlight nights alone with Charles had not touched her emotions or ripened her tomaturity. Charles had awakened no idea of what passion might be or tenderness or true intimacy ofbody or spirit.

All that passion meant to her was servitude to inexplicable male madness, unshared by females,painful and embarrassing process that led inevitably to the still more painful process ofc(a) hildbirth. That marriage should be like this was no surprise to her. Ellen had hinted before thewedding that marriage was something women must bear with dignity and fortitude, and thewhispered comments of other matrons since her widowhood had confirmed this. Scarlett was gladto be done with passion and marriage.

She was done with marriage but not with love, for her love for Ashley was something different,having nothing to do with passion or marriage, something sacred and breathtakingly beautiful, anemotion that grew stealthily through the long days of her enforced silence, feeding on oft-thumbedmemories and hopes.

She sighed as she carefully tied the ribbon about the packet, wondering for the thousandth timejust what it was in Ashley that eluded her understanding. She tried to think the matter to somesatisfactory conclusion but, as always, the conclusion evaded her uncomplex mind. She put theletters back in the lap secretary and closed the lid. Then she frowned, for her mind went back to thelast part of the letter she had just read, to his mention of Captain Butler. How strange that Ashleyshould be impressed, by something that scamp had said a year ago. Undeniably Captain Butler wasa scamp, for all that he danced divinely. No one but a scamp would say the things about theConfederacy that he had said at the bazaar.

She crossed the room to the mirror and parted her smooth hair approvingly. Her spirits rose, asalways at the sight of her white skin and slanting green eyes, and she smiled to bring out herdimples. Then she dismissed Captain Butler from her mind as she happily viewed her reflection,remembering how Ashley had always liked her dimples. No pang of conscience at loving anotherwomans husband or reading that womans mail disturbed her pleasure in her youth and charm andher renewed assurance of Ashleys love.

She unlocked the door and went down the dim winding stair with a light heart. Halfway down she began singing When This Cruel War Is Over.

Chapter 12

THE WAR went on, successfully for the most part, but people had stopped saying One morevictory and the war is over, just as they had stopped saying the Yankees were cowards. It wasobvious to all now that the Yankees were far from cowardly and that it would take more than onevictory to conquer them. However, there were the Confederate victories in Tennessee scored byGeneral Morgan and General Forrest and the triumph at the Second Battle of Bull Run hung uplike visible Yankee scalps to gloat over. But there was a heavy price on these scalps. The hospitalsand homes of Atlanta were overflowing with the sick and wounded, and more and more womenwere appearing in black. The monotonous rows of soldiers graves at Oakland Cemetery stretchedlonger every day.

Confederate money had dropped alarmingly and the price of food and clothing had risenaccordingly. The commissary was laying such heavy levies on foodstuffs that the tables of Atlantawere beginning to suffer. White flour was scarce and so expensive that corn bread was universalinstead of biscuits, rolls and waffles. The butcher shops carried almost no beef and very littlemutton, and that mutton cost so much only the rich could afford it. However there was still plentyof hog meat, as well as chickens and vegetables.

The Yankee blockade about the Confederate ports had tightened, and luxuries such as tea,coffee, silks, whalebone stays, colognes, fashion magazines and books were scarce and dear. Eventhe cheapest cotton goods had skyrocketed in price and ladies were regretfully making their olddresses do another season. Looms that had gathered dust for years had been brought down fromattics, and there were webs of homespun to be found in nearly every parlor. Everyone, soldiers,civilians, women, children and negroes, began to wear homespun. Gray, as the color of theConfederate uniform, practically disappeared and homespun of a butternut shade took its place.

Already the hospitals were worrying about the scarcity of quinine, calomel, opium, chloroformand iodine. Linen and cotton bandages were too precious now to be thrown away when used, andevery lady who nursed at the hospitals brought home baskets of bloody strips to be washed andironed and returned for use on other sufferers.

But to Scarlett, newly emerged from the chrysalis of widowhood, all the war meant was a timeof gaiety and excitement. Even the small privations of clothing and food did not annoy her, sohappy was she to be in the world again.

When she thought of the dull times of the past year, with the days going by one very much likeanother, life seemed to have quickened to an incredible speed. Every day dawned as an excitingadventure, a day in which she would meet new men who would ask to call on her, tell her howpretty she was, and how it was a privilege to fight and, perhaps, to die for her. She could and didlove Ashley with the last breath in her body, but that did not prevent her from inveigling other meninto asking to marry her.

The ever-present war in the background lent a pleasant informality to social relations, aninformality which older people viewed with alarm. Mothers found strange men calling on their daughters, men who came without letters of introduction and whose antecedents were unknown.

To their horror, mothers found their daughters holding hands with these men. Mrs. Merriwether,who had never kissed her husband until after the wedding ceremony, could scarcely believe hereyes when she caught Maybelle kissing the little Zouave, Ren Picard, and her consternation waseven greater when Maybelle refused to be ashamed. Even the fact that Ren immediately asked forher hand did not improve matters. Mrs. Merriwether felt that the South was heading for a completemoral collapse and frequently said so. Other mothers concurred heartily with her and blamed it onthe war.

But men who expected to die within a week or a month could not wait a year before they beggedto call a girl by her first name, with Miss, of course, preceding it. Nor would they go through theformal and protracted courtships which good manners had prescribed before the war. They werelikely to propose in three or four months. And girls who knew very well that a lady always refuseda gentleman the first three times he proposed rushed headlong to accept the first time.

This informality made the war a lot of fun for Scarlett. Except for the messy business of nursingand the bore of bandage rolling, she did not care if the war lasted forever. In fact, she could endurethe hospital with equanimity now because it was a perfect happy hunting ground. The helplesswounded succumbed to her charms without a struggle. Renew their bandages, wash their faces, patup their pillows and fan them, and they fell in love. Oh, it was Heaven after the last dreary year!

Scarlett was back again where she had been before she married Charles and it was as if she hadnever married him, never felt the shock of his death, never borne Wade. War and marriage andchildbirth had passed over her without touching any deep chord within her and she was unchanged.

She had a child but he was cared for so well by the others in the red brick house she could almostforget him. In her mind and heart, she was Scarlett OHara again, the belle of the County. Herthoughts and activities were the same as they had been in the old days, but the field of heractivities had widened immensely. Careless of the disapproval of Aunt Pittys friends, she behavedas she had behaved before her marriage, went to parties, danced, went riding with soldiers, flirted,did everything she had done as a girl, except stop wearing mourning. This she knew would be astraw that would break the backs of Pittypat and Melanie. She was as charming a widow as she hadbeen a girl, pleasant when she had her own way, obliging as long as it did not discommode her,vain of her looks and her popularity.

She was happy now where a few weeks before she had been miserable, happy with her beauxand their reassurances of her charm, as happy as she could be with Ashley married to Melanie andin danger. But somehow it was easier to bear the thought of Ashley belonging to some one elsewhen he was far away. With the hundreds of miles stretching between Atlanta and Virginia, hesometimes seemed as much hers as Melanies.

So the autumn months of 1862 went swiftly by with nursing, dancing, driving and bandagerolling taking up all the time she did not spend brief visits to Tara. These visits were disappointing,forshehadlittleopportunityforthelong(on) quiet talks with her mother to which shelooked forward while in Atlanta, no time to sit by Ellen while she sewed, smelling the faintfragrance of lemon verbena sachet as her skirts rustled, feeling her soft hands on her cheek in agentle caress.

Ellen was thin and preoccupied now and on her feet from morning until long after the plantationwas asleep. The demands of the Confederate commissary were growing heavier by the month, andhers was the task of making Tara produce. Even Gerald was busy, for the first time in many years,for he could get no overseer to take Jonas Wilkersons place and he was riding his own acres. WithEllen too busy for more than a goodnight kiss and Gerald in the fields all day, Scarlett found Taraboring. Even her sisters were taken up with their own concerns. Suellen had now come to anunderstanding with Frank Kennedy and sang When This Cruel War Is Over with an archmeaning Scarlett found well-nigh unendurable, and Carreen was too wrapped up in dreams ofBrent Tarleton to be interesting company.

Though Scarlett always went home to Tara with a happy heart, she was never sorry when theinevitable letters came from Pitty and Melanie, begging her to return. Ellen always sighed at thesetimes, saddened by the thought of her oldest daughter and her only grandchild leaving her.

But I mustnt be selfish and keep you here when you are needed to nurse in Atlanta, she said.

Onlyonly, my darling, it seems that I never get the time to talk to you and to feel that you aremy own little girl again before you are gone from me.

Im always your little girl, Scarlett would say and bury her head upon Ellens breast, her guiltrising up to accuse her. She did not tell her mother that it was the dancing and the beaux whichdrew her back to Atlanta and not the service of the Confederacy. There were many things she keptfrom her mother these days. But, most of all, she kept secret the fact that Rhett Butler called frequentlyat Aunt Pittypats house.

During the months that followed the bazaar, Rhett called whenever he was in town, takingScarlett riding in his carriage, escorting her to danceables and bazaars and waiting outside thehospital to drive her home. She lost her fear of his betraying her secret, but there always lurked inthe back of her mind the disquieting memory that he had seen her at her worst and knew the truthabout Ashley. It was this knowledge that checked her tongue when he annoyed her. And heannoyed her frequently.

He was in his mid-thirties, older than any beau she had ever had, and she was as helpless as achild to control and handle him as she had handled beaux nearer her own age. He always looked asif nothing had ever surprised him and much had amused him and, when he had gotten her into aspeechless temper, she felt that she amused him more than anything in the world. Frequently sheflared into open wrath under his expert baiting, for she had Geralds Irish temper along with thedeceptive sweetness of face she had inherited from Ellen. Heretofore she had never bothered tocontrol her temper except in Ellens presence. Now it was painful to have to choke back words forfear of his amused grin. If only he would ever lose his temper too, then she would not feel at such adisadvantage.

After tilts with him from which she seldom emerged the victor she vowed he was impossible,ill-bred and no gentleman and she would have nothing more to do with him. But sooner or later, hereturned to Atlanta, called, presumably on Aunt Pitty, and presented Scarlett, with overdonegallantry, a box of bonbons he had brought her from Nassau. Or preempted a seat by her at amusicale or claimed her at a dance, and she was usually so amused by his bland impudence that she laughed and overlooked his past misdeeds until the next occurred.

For all his exasperating qualities, she grew to look forward to his calls. There was somethingexciting about him that she could not analyze, something different from any man she had everknown. There was something breathtaking in the grace of his big body which made his veryentrance into a room like an abrupt physical impact, something in the impertinence and blandmockery of his dark eyes that challenged her spirit to subdue him.

Its almost like I was in love with him! she thought, bewildered. But Im not and I just cantunderstand it.

But the exciting feeling persisted. When he came to call, his complete masculinity made AuntPittys well-bred and ladylike house seem small, pale and a trifle fusty. Scarlett was not the onlymember of the household who reacted strangely and unwillingly to his presence, for her kept AuntPitty in a flutter and a ferment.

While Pitty knew Ellen would disapprove of his calls on her daughter, and knew also that theedict of Charleston banning him from polite society was not one to be lightly disregarded, shecould no more resist his elaborate compliments and hand kissing than a fly can resist a honey pot.

Moreover, he usually brought her some little gift from Nassau which he assured her he hadpurchased especially for her and blockaded in at risk of his lifepapers of pins and needles,buttons, spools of silk thread and hairpins. It was almost impossible to obtain these small luxuriesnowladies were wearing hand-whittled wooden hairpins and covering acrons with cloth forbuttonsand Pitty lacked the moral stamina to refuse them. Besides, she had a childish love ofsurprise packages and could not resist opening his gifts. And, having once opened them, she didnot feel that she could refuse them. Then, having accepted his gifts, she could not summon courageenough to tell him his reputation made it improper for him to call on three lone women who had nomale protector. Aunt Pitty always felt that she needed a male protector when Rhett Butler was inthe house.

I dont know what it is about him, she would sigh helplessly. Butwell, I think hed be anice, attractive man if I could just feel thatwell, that deep down in his heart he respectedwomen.

Since the return of her wedding ring, Melanie had felt that Rhett was a gentleman of rarerefinement and delicacy and she was shocked at this remark. He was unfailingly courteous to her,but she was a little timid with him, largely because she was shy with any man she had not knownfrom childhood. Secretly she was very sorry for him, a feeling which would have amused him hadhe been aware of it. She was certain that some romantic sorrow had blighted his life and made himhard and bitter, and she felt that what he needed was the love of a good woman. In all her shelteredlife she had never seen evil and could scarcely credit its existence, and when gossip whisperedthings about Rhett and the girl in Charleston she was shocked and unbelieving. And, instead ofturning her against him, it only made her more timidly gracious toward him because of herindignation at what she fancied was a gross injustice done him.

Scarlett silently agreed with Aunt Pitty. She, too, felt that he had no respect for any woman,unless perhaps for Melanie. She still felt unclothed every time his eyes ran up and down her figure.

It was not that he ever said anything. Then she could have scorched him with hot words. It was the bold way his eyes looked out of his swarthy face with a displeasing air of insolence, as if allwomen were his property to be enjoyed in his own good time. Only with Melanie was this lookabsent. There was never that cool look of appraisal, never mockery in his eyes, when he looked atMelanie; and there was an especial note in his voice when he spoke to her, courteous, respectful,anxious to be of service.

I dont see why youre so much nicer to her than to me, said Scarlett petulantly, one afternoonwhen Melanie and Pitty had retired to take their naps and she was alone with him.

For an hour she had watched Rhett hold the yarn Melanie was winding for knitting, had notedthe blank inscrutable expression when Melanie talked at length and with pride of Ashley and hispromotion. Scarlett knew Rhett had no exalted opinion of Ashley and cared nothing at all about thefact that he had been made a major. Yet he made polite replies and murmured the correct thingsabout Ashleys gallantry.

And if I so much as mention Ashleys name, she had thought irritably, he cocks his eyebrow upand smiles that nasty, knowing smile!

Im much prettier than she is, she continued, and I dont see why youre nicer to her.

Dare I hope that you are jealous?

Oh, dont presume!

Another hope crushed. If I am nicer to Mrs. Wilkes, it is because she deserves it. She is one ofthe very few kind, sincere and unselfish persons I have ever known. But perhaps you have failed tonote these qualities. And moreover, for all her youth, she is one of the few great ladies I have everbeen privileged to know.

Do you mean to say you dont think Im a great lady, too?

I think we agreed on the occasion of our first meeting that you were no lady at all.

Oh, if you are going to be hateful and rude enough to bring that up again! How can you holdthat bit of childish temper against me? That was so long ago and Ive grown up since then and Idforget all about it if you werent always harping and hinting about it.

I dont think it was childish temper and I dont believe youve changed. You are just as capablenow as then of throwing vases if you dont get your own way. But you usually get your way now.

And so theres no necessity for broken bric-a-brac.

Oh, you areI wish I was a man! Id call you out and

And get killed for your pains. I can drill a dime at fifty yards. Better stick to your own weaponsdimples, vases and the like.

You are just a rascal.

Do you expect me to fly into a rage at that? I am sorry to disappoint you. You cant make memad by calling me names that are true. Certainly Im a rascal, and why not? Its a free country anda man may be a rascal if he chooses. Its only hypocrites like you, my dear lady, just as black atheart but trying to hide it, who become enraged when called by their right names.

She was helpless before his calm smile and his drawling remarks, for she had never before metanyone who was so completely impregnable. Her weapons of scorn, coldness and abuse blunted inher hands, for nothing she could say would shame him. It had been her experience that the liar wasthe hottest to defend his veracity, the coward his courage, the ill-bred his gentlemanliness, and thecad his honor. But not Rhett. He admitted everything and laughed and dared her to say more.

He came and went during these months, arriving unheralded and leaving without saying good-by. Scarlett never discovered just what business brought him to Atlanta, for few other blockadersfound it necessary to come so far away from the coast. They landed their cargoes at Wilmington orCharleston, where they were met by swarms of merchants and speculators from all over the Southwho assembled to buy blockaded goods at auction. It would have pleased her to think that he madethese trips to see her, but even her abnormal vanity refused to believe this. If he had ever oncemade love to her, seemed jealous of the other men who crowded about her, even tried to hold herhand or begged for a picture or a handkerchief to cherish, she would have thought triumphantly hehad been caught by her charms. But he remained annoyingly unloverlike and, worst of all, seemedto see through all her maneuverings to bring him to his knees.

Whenever he came to town, there was a feminine fluttering. Not only did the romantic aura ofthe dashing blockader hang about him but there was also the titillating element of the wicked andthe forbidden. He had such a bad reputation! And every time the matrons of Atlanta gatheredtogether to gossip, his reputation grew worse, which only made him all the more glamorous to theyoung girls. As most of them were quite innocent, they had heard little more than that he wasquite loose with womenand exactly how a man went about the business of being loose theydid not know. They also heard whispers that no girt was safe with him. With such a reputation, itwas strange that he had never so much as kissed the hand of an unmarried girl since he firstappeared in Atlanta. But that only served to make him more mysterious and more exciting.

Outside of the army heroes, he was the most talked-about man in Atlanta. Everyone knew indetail how he had been expelled from West Point for drunkenness and something about women.

That terrific scandal concerning the Charleston girl he had compromised and the brother he hadkilled was public property. Correspondence with Charleston friends elicited the further informationthat his father, a charming old gentleman with an iron will and a ramrod for a backbone, had casthim out without a penny when he was twenty and even stricken his name from the family Bible.

After that he had wandered to California in the gold rush of 1849 and thence to South America andCuba, and the reports of his activities in these parts were none too savory. Scrapes about women,several shootings, gun running to the revolutionists in Central America and, worst of all,professional gambling were included in his career, as Atlanta heard it.

There was hardly a family in Georgia who could not own to their sorrow at least one malemember or relative who gambled, losing money, houses, land and slaves. But that was different. Aman could gamble himself to poverty and still be a gentleman, but a professional gambler couldnever be anything but an outcast.

Had it not been for the upset conditions due to the war and his own services to the Confederategovernment, Rhett Butler would never have been received in Atlanta. But now, even the most straitlaced felt that patriotism called upon them to be more broad minded. The more sentimental wereinclined to view that the black sheep of the Butler family had repented of his evil ways and was making an attempt to atone for his sins. So the ladies felt in duty bound to stretch a point,especially in the of intrepid blockader. Everyone knew now that the fate of the Confederacyrestedasm(case) uchu(so) pontheski(a) ll of the blockade boats in eluding the Yankee fleet as itdid upon the soldiers at the front.

Rumor had it that Captain Butler was one of the best pilots in the South and that he was recklessand utterly without nerves. Reared in Charleston, he knew every inlet, creek, shoal and rock of theCarolina coast near that port, and he was equally at home in the waters around Wilmington. He hadnever lost a boat or even been forced to dump a cargo. At the onset of the war, he had emergedfrom obscurity with enough money to buy a small swift boat and now, when blockaded goodsrealized two thousand per cent on each cargo, he owned four boats. He had good pilots and paidthem well, and they slid out of Charleston and Wilmington on dark nights, bearing cotton forNassau, England and Canada. The cotton mills of England were standing idle and the workerswere starving, and any blockader who could outwit the Yankee fleet could command his own pricein Liverpool. Rhetts boats were singularly lucky both in taking out cotton for the Confederacy andbringing in the war materials for which the South was desperate. Yes, the ladies felt they couldforgive and forget a great many things for such a brave man.

He was a dashing figure and one that people turned to look at. He spent money freely, rode awild black stallion, and wore clothes which were always the height of style and tailoring. The latterin itself was enough to attract attention to him, for the uniforms of the soldiers were dingy andworn now and the civilians, even when turned out in their best, showed skillful patching anddarning. Scarlett thought she had such elegant pants as he wore, fawn colored, shepherds plaid, andchecked.As for his w(never) aistco(seen) ats, they were indescribably handsome, especiallythe white watered-silk one with tiny pink rosebuds embroidered on it. And he wore these garmentswith a still more elegant air as though unaware of their glory.

There were few ladies who could resist his charms when he chose to exert them, and finallyeven Mrs. Merriwether unbent and invited him to Sunday dinner.

Maybelle Merriwether was to marry her little Zouave when he got his next furlough, and shecried every time she thought of it, for she had set her heart on marrying in a white satin dress andthere was no white satin in the Confederacy. Nor could she borrow a dress, for the satin weddingdresses of years past had all gone into the making of battle flags. Useless for the patriotic Mrs.

Merriwether to upbraid her daughter and point out that homespun was the proper bridal attire for aConfederate bride. Maybelle wanted satin. She was willing, even proud to go without hairpins andbuttons and nice shoes and candy and tea for the sake of the Cause, but she wanted a satin weddingdress.

Rhett, hearing of this from Melanie, brought in from England yards and yards of gleaming whitesatin and a lace veil and presented them to her as a wedding gift. He did it in such a way that it wasunthinkable to even mention paying him for them, and Maybelle was so delighted she almostkissed him. Mrs. Merriwether knew that so expensive a giftand a gift of clothing at thatwashighly improper, but she could think of no way of refusing when Rhett told her in the most floridlanguage that nothing was too good to deck the bride of one of our brave heroes. So Mrs.

Merriwether invited him to dinner, feeling that this concession more than paid for the gift.

He not only brought Maybelle the satin but he was able to give excellent hints on the making ofthe wedding dress. Hoops in Paris were wider this season and skirts were shorter. They were nolonger ruffled but were gathered up in scalloped festoons, showing braided petticoats beneath. Hesaid, too, that he had seen no pantalets on the streets, so he imagined they were out. Afterwards,Mrs. Merriwether told Mrs. Elsing she feared that if she had given him any encouragement at all,he would have told her exactly what kind of drawers were being worn by Parisiennes.

Had he been less obviously masculine, his ability to recall details of dresses, bonnets andcoiffures would have been put down as the rankest effeminacy. The ladies always felt a little oddwhen they besieged him with questions about styles, but they did it nevertheless. They were asisolated from the world of fashion as shipwrecked mariners, for few books of fashion camethrough the blockade. For all they knew the ladies of France might be shaving their heads andwearing coonskin caps, so Rhetts memory for furbelows was an excellent substitute for GodeysLadys Book. He could and did notice details so dear to feminine hearts, and after each trip abroadhe could be found in the center of a group of ladies, telling that bonnets were smaller this year andperched higher, covering most of the top of the head, that plumes and not flowers were being usedto trim them, that the Empress of France had abandoned the chignon for evening wear and had herhair piled almost on the top of her head, showing all of her ears, and that evening frocks wereshockingly low again.

For some months, he was the most popular and romantic figure the town knew, despite hisprevious reputation, despite the faint rumors that he was engaged not only in blockading but inspeculating on foodstuffs, too. People who did not like him said that after every trip he made toAtlanta, prices jumped five dollars. But even with this under-cover gossip seeping about, he couldhave retained his popularity had he considered it worth retaining. Instead, it seemed as though,after trying the company of the staid and patriotic citizens and winning their respect and grudgingliking, something perverse in him made him go out of his way to affront them and show them thathis conduct had been only a masquerade and one which no longer amused him.

It was as though he bore an impersonal contempt for everyone and everything in the South, theConfederacy in particular, and toot pains to conceal it. It was his remarks about the Confederacythatmade Atlantalookathi(no) m first in bewilderment, then coolly and then with hotrage. Even before 1862 passed into 1863, men were bowing to him with studied frigidity andwomen beginning to draw their daughters to their sides when he appeared at a gathering.

He seemed to take pleasure not only in affronting the sincere and red-hot loyalties of Atlanta butin presenting himself in the worst possible light. When well-meaning people complimented him onhis bravery in running the blockade, he blandly replied that he was always frightened when indanger, as frightened as were the brave boys at the front. Everyone knew there had never been acowardly Confederate soldier and they found this statement peculiarly irritating. He alwaysreferred to the soldiers as our brave boys and our heroes in gray and did it in such a way as toconvey the utmost in insult. When daring young ladies, hoping for a flirtation, thanked him forbeing one of the heroes who fought for them, he bowed and declared that such was not the case,for he would do the same thing for Yankee women if the same amount of money were involved.

Since Scarletts first meeting with him in Atlanta on the night of the bazaar, he had talked withher in this manner, but now mere was a thinly veiled note of mockery in his conversations witheveryone. When praised for his services to the Confederacy, he unfailingly replied that blockadingwas a business with him. If he could make as much money out of government contracts, he wouldsay, picking out with his eyes those who had government contracts, then he would certainlyabandon the hazards of blockading and take to selling shoddy cloth, sanded sugar, spoiled flourand rotten leather to the Confederacy.

Most of his remarks were unanswerable, which made them all the worse. There had alreadybeen minor scandals about those holding government contracts. Letters from men at the frontcomplained constantly of shoes that wore out in a week, gunpowder that would not ignite, harnessthat snapped at any strain, meat that was rotten and flour that was full of weevils. Atlanta peopletried to think that the men who sold such stuff to the government must be contract holders fromAlabama or Virginia or Tennessee, and not Georgians. For did not the Georgia contract holdersinclude men from the very best families? Were they not the first to contribute to the hospital fundsand to the aid of soldiers orphans? Were they not the first to cheer at Dixie and the mostrampant seekers, in oratory at least, for Yankee blood? The full tide of fury against thoseprofiteering on government contracts had not yet risen, and Rhetts words were taken merely asevidence of his own bad breeding.

He not only affronted the town with insinuations of venality on the part of men in high placesand slurs on the courage of the men in the field, but he took pleasure in tricking the dignifiedcitizenry into embarrassing situations. He could no more resist pricking the conceits, the hypocrisiesand the flamboyant patriotism of those about him than a small boy can resist putting a pininto a balloon. He neatly deflated the pompous and exposed the ignorant and the bigoted, and hedid it in such subtle ways, drawing his victims out by his seemingly courteous interest, that theynever were quite certain what had happened until they stood exposed as windy, high flown andslightly ridiculous.

During the months when the town accepted him, Scarlett had been under no illusions about him.

She knew that his elaborate gallantries and his florid speeches were all done with his tongue in hischeek. She knew that he was acting the part of the dashing and patriotic blockade runner simplybecause it amused him. Sometimes he seemed to her like the County boys with whom she hadgrown up, the wild Tarleton twins with their obsession for practical jokes: the devil-inspiredFontaines, teasing, mischievous; the Calverts who would sit up all night planning hoaxes. But therewas a difference, for beneath Rhetts seeming lightness there was something malicious, almostsinister in its suave brutality.

Though she was thoroughly aware of his insincerity, she much preferred him in the r.le of theromantic blockader. For one thing, it made her own situation in associating with him so mucheasier than it had been at first. So, she was intensely annoyed when he dropped his masquerade andset out apparently upon a deliberate campaign to alienate Atlantas good will. It annoyed herbecause it seemed foolish and also because some of the harsh criticism directed at him fell on her.

It was at Mrs. Elsings silver musicale for the benefit of the convalescents that Rhett signed hisfinal warrant of ostracism. That afternoon the Elsing home was crowded with soldiers on leave andmen from the hospitals, members of the Home Guard and the militia unit, and matrons, widows and young girls. Every chair in the house was occupied, and even the long winding stair waspacked with guests. The large cut-glass bowl held at the door by the Elsings butler had beenemptied twice of its burden of silver coins: That in itself was enough to make the affair a success,for now a dollar in silver was worth sixty dollars in Confederate paper money.

Every girl with any pretense to accomplishments had sung or played the piano, and the tableauxvivants had been greeted with flattering applause. Scarlett was much pleased with herself, for notonly had she and Melanie rendered a touching duet, When the Dew Is on the Blossom, followedas an encore by the more sprightly Oh, Lawd, Ladies, Dont Mind Stephen! but she had alsobeen chosen to represent the Spirit of the Confederacy in the last tableau.

She had looked most fetching, wearing a modestly draped Greek robe of white cheeseclothgirdled with red and blue and holding the Stars and Bars in one hand, while with the other shestretched out to the kneeling Captain Carey Ashburn, of Alabama, the gold-hilted saber which hadbelonged to Charles and his father.

When her tableau was over, she could not help seeking Rhetts eyes to see if he had appreciatedthe pretty picture she made. With a feeling of exasperation she saw that he was in an argument andprobably had not even noticed her. Scarlett could see by the faces of the group surrounding himthat they were infuriated by what he was saying.

She made her way toward them and, in one of those odd silences which sometimes fall on agathering, she heard Willie Guinan, of the militia outfit, say plainly: Do I understand, sir, that youmean the Cause for which our heroes have died is not sacred?

If you were run over by a railroad train your death wouldnt sanctify the railroad company,would it? asked Rhett, and his voice sounded as if he were humbly seeking information.

Sir, said Willie, his voice shaking, if we were not under this roof

I tremble to think what would happen, said Rhett. For, of course, your bravery is too wellknown.

Willie went scarlet and all conversation ceased. Everyone was embarrassed. Willie was strongand healthy and of military age and yet he wasnt at the front. Of course, he was the only boy hismother had and, after all, somebody had to be in the militia to protect the state. But there were afew irreverent snickers from convalescent officers when Rhett spoke of bravery.

Oh, why doesnt he keep his mouth shut! thought Scarlett indignantly. Hes simply spoilingthe whole party!

Dr. Meades brows were thunderous.

Nothing may be sacred to you, young man, he said, in the voice he always used when makingspeeches. But there are many things sacred to the patriotic men and ladies of the South. And thefreedom of our land from the usurper is one and States Rights is another and

Rhett looked lazy and his voice had a silky, almost bored, note.

All wars are sacred, he said. To those who have to fight them. If the people who started warsdidnt make them sacred, who would be foolish enough to fight? But, no matter what rallying criesthe orators give to the idiots who fight, no matter what noble purposes they assign to wars, there is never but one reason for a war. And that is money. All wars are in reality money squabbles. But sofew people ever realize it. Their ears are too full of bugles and drums and the fine words from stay-at-home orators. Sometimes the rallying cry is Save the Tomb of Christ from the Heathen!

Sometimes its Down with Popery! and sometimes Liberty! and sometimes Cotton, Slaveryand States Rights!

What on earth has the Pope to do with it? thought Scarlett. Or Christs tomb, either?

But as she hurried toward the incensed group, she saw Rhett bow jauntily and start toward thedoorway through the crowd. She started after him but Mrs. Elsing caught her skirt and held her.

Let him go, she said in a clear voice that carried throughout the tensely quiet room. Let himgo. He is a traitor, a speculator! He is a viper that we have nursed to our bosoms!

Rhett, standing in the hall, his hat in his hand, heard as he was intended to hear and, turning,surveyed the room for a moment. He looked pointedly at Mrs. Elsings flat bosom, grinnedsuddenly and, bowing, made his exit.

Mrs. Merriwether rode home in Aunt Pittys carriage, and scarcely had the four ladies seatedthemselves when she exploded.

There now, Pittypat Hamilton! I hope you are satisfied!

With what? cried Pitty, apprehensively.

With the conduct of that wretched Butler man youve been harboring.

Pittypat fluttered, too upset by the accusation to recall that Mrs. Merriwether had also beenRhett Butlers hostess on several occasions. Scarlett and Melanie thought of this, but bred topoliteness to their elders, refrained from remarking on the matter. Instead they studiously lookeddown at their mittened hands.

He insulted us all and the Confederacy too, said Mrs. Merriwether, and her stout bust heavedviolently beneath its glittering passementerie trimmings. Saying that we were fighting for money!

Saying that our leaders had lied to us! He should be put in jail. Yes, he should. I shall speak to Dr.

Meade about it. If Mr. Merriwether were only alive, hed tend to him! Now, Pitty Hamilton, youlisten to me. You mustnt ever let that scamp come into your house again!

Oh, mumbled Pitty, helplessly, looking if she wished she were dead. She looked appealinglyatthetwo girls who kept their eyes cas(as) t down and then hopefully toward Uncle Peterserect back. She knew he was listening attentively to every word and she hoped he would turn andtake a hand in the conversation, as he frequently did. She hoped he would say: Now, Miss Dolly,you let Miss Pitty be, but Peter made no move. He disapproved heartily of Rhett Butler and poorPitty knew it. She sighed and said: Well, Dolly, if you think

I do think, returned Mrs. Merriwether firmly. I cant imagine what possessed you to receivehim in the first place. After this afternoon, there wont be a decent home in town that hell bewelcome in. Do get up some gumption and forbid him your house.

She turned a sharp eye on the girls. I hope you two are marking my words, she continued, for its partly your fault, being so pleasant to him. Just tell him politely but firmly that his presenceand his disloyal talk are distinctly unwelcome at your house.

By this time Scarlett was boiling, ready to rear like a horse at the touch of a strange rough handon its bridle. But she was afraid to speak. She could not risk Mrs. Merriwether writing anotherletter to her mother.

You old buffalo! she thought, her face crimson with suppressed fury. How heavenly it wouldbe to tell you just what I think of you and your bossy ways!

I never thought to live long enough to hear such disloyal words spoken of our Cause, went onMrs. Merriwether, by this time in a ferment of righteous anger. Any man who does not think ourCause is just and holy should be hanged! I dont want to hear of you two girls ever even speakingto him again For Heavens sake, Melly, what ails you?

Melanie was white and her eyes were enormous.

I will speak to him again, she said in a low voice. I will not be rude to him. I will not forbidhim the house.

Mrs. Merriwethers breath went out of her lungs as explosively as though she had been punched.

Aunt Pittys fat mouth popped open and Uncle Peter turned to stare.

Now, why didnt I have the gumption to say that? thought Scarlett, jealousy mixing withadmiration. How did that little rabbit ever get up spunk enough to stand up to old ladyMerriwether?

Melanies hands were shaking but she went on hurriedly, as though fearing her courage wouldfail her if she delayed.

I wont be rude to him because of what he said, because It was rude of him to say it out loudmost ill advisedbut itsits what Ashley thinks. And I cant forbid the house to a man whothinks what my husband thinks. It would be unjust.

Mrs. Merriwethers breath had come back and she charged.

Melly Hamilton, I never heard such a lie in all my life! There was never a Wilkes who was acoward

I never said Ashley was a coward, said Melanie, her eyes beginning to flash. I said he thinkswhat Captain Butler thinks, only he expresses it in different words. And he doesnt go aroundsaying it at musicales, I hope. But he has written it to me.

Scarletts guilty conscience stirred as she tried to recall what Ashley might have written thatwould lead Melanie to make such a statement, but most of the letters she had read had gone out ofher head as soon as she finished reading them. She believed Melanie had simply taken leave of hersenses.

Ashley wrote me that we should not be fighting the Yankees. And that we have been betrayedinto it by statesmen and orators mouthing catchwords and prejudices, said Melly rapidly. He saidnothing in the world was worth what this war was going to do to us. He said here wasnt anythingat all to gloryit was just misery and dirt.

Oh! That letter, thought Scarlett. Was that what he meant?

I dont believe it, said Mrs. Merriwether firmly. You misunderstood his meaning.

I never misunderstand Ashley, Melanie replied quietly, though her lips were trembling. Iunderstand him perfectly. He meant exactly what Captain Butler meant, only he didnt say it in arude way.

You should be ashamed of yourself, comparing a fine man like Ashley Wilkes to a scoundrellike Captain Butler! I suppose you, too, think the Cause is nothing!

II dont know what I think, Melanie began uncertainly, her fire deserting her and panic ather outspokenness taking hold of her. IId die for the Cause, like Ashley would. ButI meanI mean, Ill let the men folks do the thinking, because they are so much smarter.

I never heard the like, snorted Mrs. Merriwether. Stop, Uncle Peter, youre driving past myhouse!

Uncle Peter, preoccupied with the conversation behind him, had driven past the Merriwethercarriage block and he backed up the horse. Mrs. Merriwether alighted, her bonnet ribbons shakinglike sails in a storm.

Youll be sorry, she said.

Uncle Peter whipped up the horse.

You young misses ought ter tek shame, gittin Miss Pitty in a state, he scolded.

Im not in a state, replied Pitty, surprisingly, for less strain than this had frequently brought onfainting fits. Melly, honey, I knew you were doing it just to take up for me and, really, I was gladto see somebody take Dolly down a peg. Shes so bossy. How did you have the courage? But doyou think you should have said that about Ashley?

But its true, answered Melanie and she began to cry softly. And Im not ashamed that hethinks that way. He thinks the war is all wrong but hes willing to fight and die anyway, and thattakes lots more courage than fighting for something you think is right.

Lawd, Miss Melly, doan cry hyah on Peachtree Street, groaned Uncle Peter, hastening hishorses pace. Folksll talk sumpin scanlous. Wait till us gits home.

Scarlett said nothing. She did not even squeeze the hand that Melanie had inserted into her palmfor comfort. She had read Ashleys letters for only one purposeto assure herself that he stillloved her. Now Melanie had given a new meaning to passages in the letters which Scarletts eyeshad barely seen. It shocked her to realize that anyone as absolutely perfect as Ashley could haveany thought in common with such a reprobate as Rhett Butler. She thought: They both see thetruth of this war, but Ashley is willing to die about it and Rhett isnt. I think that shows Rhettsgood sense. She paused a moment, horror struck that she could have such a thought about Ashley.

They both see the same unpleasant truth, but Rhett likes to look it in the face and enrage peopleby talking about itand Ashley can hardly bear to face it

It was very bewildering.

Chapter 13

UNDER MRS. MERRIWETHERS GOADING, Dr. Meade took action, in the form of a letter tothe newspaper wherein be did not mention Rhett by name, though his meaning was obvious. Theeditor, sensing the social drama of the letter, put it on the second page of the paper, in itself astartling innovation, as the first two pages of the paper were always devoted to advertisements ofslaves, mules, plows, coffins, houses for sale or rent, cures for private diseases, abortifacients andrestoratives for lost manhood.

The doctors letter was the first of a chorus of indignation that was beginning to be heard allover the South against speculators, profiteers and holders of government contracts. Conditions inWilmington, the chief blockade port, now that Charlestons port was practically sealed by theYankee gunboats, had reached the proportions of an open scandal. Speculators swarmedWilmington and, having the ready cash, bought up boatloads of goods and held them for a rise inprices. The rise always came, for with the increasing scarcity of necessities, prices leaped higherby the month. The civilian population had either to do without or buy at the speculators prices,and the poor and those in moderate circumstances were suffering increasing hardships. With therise in prices, Confederate money sank, and with its rapid fall there rose a wild passion forluxuries. Blockaders were commissioned to bring in necessities but now it was the higher-pricedluxuries that filled their boats to the exclusion of the things the Confederacy vitally needed. Peoplefrenziedly bought these luxuries with the money they had today, fearing that tomorrows priceswould be higher and the money worthless.

To make matters worse, there was only one railroad line from Wilmington to Richmond and,while thousands of barrels of flour and boxes of bacon spoiled and rotted in wayside stations forwant of transportation, speculators with wines, taffetas and coffee to sell seemed always able to gettheir goods to Richmond two days after they were landed at Wilmington.

The rumor which had been creeping about underground was now being openly discussed, thatRhett Butler not only ran his own four boats and sold the cargoes at unheard-of prices but boughtup the cargoes of other boats and held them for rises in prices. It was said that he was at the headof a combine worth more than a million dollars, with Wilmington as its headquarters for the purposeof buying blockade goods on the docks. They had dozens of warehouses in that city and inRichmond, so the story ran, and the warehouses were crammed with food and clothing that werebeing held for higher prices. Already soldiers and civilians alike were feeling the pinch, and themuttering against him and his fellow speculators was bitter.

There are many brave and patriotic men in the blockade arm of the Confederacys navalservice, ran the last of the doctors letter, unselfish men who are risking their lives and all theirwealth that the Confederacy may survive. They are enshrined in the hearts of all loyal Southerners,and no one begrudges them the scant monetary returns they make for their risks. They are unselfishgentlemen, and we honor them. Of these men, I do not speak.

But there are other scoundrels who masquerade under the cloak of the blockader for their ownselfish gains, and I call down the just wrath and vengeance of an embattled people, fighting in thejustest of Causes, on these human vultures who bring in satins and laces when our men are dyingfor want of quinine, who load their boats with tea and wines when our heroes are writhing for lack of morphia. I execrate these vampires who are sucking the lifeblood of the men who follow RobertLeethese men who are making the very name of blockader a stench in the nostrils of all patrioticmen. How can we endure these scavengers in our midst with their varnished boots when our boysare tramping barefoot into battle? How can we tolerate them with their champagnes and their patesof Strasbourg when our soldiers are shivering about their camp fires and gnawing moldy bacon? Icall upon every loyal Confederate to cast them out.

Atlanta read, knew the oracle had spoken, and, as loyal Confederates, they hastened to castRhett out.

Of all the homes which had received him in the fall of 1862, Miss Pittypats was almost the onlyone into which he could enter in 1863. And, except for Melanie, he probably would not have beenreceived there. Aunt Pitty was in a state whenever he was in town. She knew very well what herfriends were saying when she permitted him to call but she still lacked the courage to tell him hewas unwelcome. Each time he arrived in Atlanta, she set her fat mouth and told the girls that shewould meet him at the door and forbid him to enter. And each time he came, a little package in hishand and a compliment for her charm and beauty on his lips, she wilted.

I just dont know what to do, she would moan. He just looks at me and IIm scared todeath of what he would do if I told him. Hes got such a bad reputation. Do you suppose he wouldstrike meoror Oh, dear, if Charlie were only alive! Scarlett, you must tell him not to callagaintell him in a nice way. Oh, me! I do believe you encourage him, and the whole town istalking and, if your mother ever finds out, what will she say to me? Melly, you must not be so niceto him. Be cool and distant and he will understand. Oh, Melly, do you think Id better write Henrya note and ask him to speak to Captain Butler?

No, I dont, said Melanie. And I wont be rude to him, either. I think people are acting likechickens with their heads off about Captain Butler. Im sure he cant be all the bad things Dr.

Meade and Mrs. Merriwether say he is. He wouldnt hold food from starving people. Why, he evengave me a hundred dollars for the orphans. Im sure hes just as loyal and patriotic as any of us andhes just too proud to defend himself. You know how obstinate men are when they get their backsup.

Aunt Pitty knew nothing about men, either with their backs up or otherwise, and she could onlywave her fat little hands helplessly. As for Scarlett, she had long ago become resigned to Melanieshabit of seeing good in everyone. Melanie was a fool, but there was nothing anybody could doabout it.

Scarlett knew that Rhett was not being patriotic and, though she would have died rather thanconfess it, she did not care. The little presents he brought her from Nassau, little oddments that alady could accept with propriety, were what mattered most to her. With prices as high as they were,where on earth could she get needles and bonbons and hairpins, if she forbade the house to him?

No, it was easier to shift the responsibility to Aunt Pitty, who after all was the head of the house,the chaperon and the arbiter of morals. Scarlett knew the town gossiped about Rhetts calls, andabout her too; but she also knew that in the eyes of Atlanta Melanie Wilkes could do no wrong, andif Melanie defended Rhett his calls were still tinged with respectability.

However, life would be pleasanter if Rhett would recant his heresies. She wouldnt have to suffer the embarrassment of seeing him cut openly when she walked down Peachtree Street withhim.

Even if you think such things, why do you say them? she scolded. If youd just think whatyou please but keep your mouth shut, everything would be so much nicer.

Thats your system, isnt it, my green-eyed hypocrite? Scarlett, Scarlett! I hoped for morecourageous conduct from you. I thought the Irish said what they thought and the Divvil take thehindermost. Tell me truthfully, dont you sometimes almost burst from keeping your mouth shut?

Wellyes, Scarlett confessed reluctantly. I do get awfully bored when they talk about theCause, morning, noon and night. But goodness, Rhett Butler, if I admitted it nobody would speakto me and none of the boys would dance with me!

Ah, yes, and one must be danced with, at all costs. Well, I admire your self-control but I do notfind myself equal to it. Nor can I masquerade in a cloak of romance and patriotism, no matter howconvenient it might be. There are enough stupid patriots who are risking every cent they have inthe blockade and who are going to come out of this war paupers. They dont need me among theirnumber, either to brighten the record of patriotism or to increase the roll of paupers, Let them havethe haloes. They deserve themfor once I am being sincereand, besides, haloes will be about allthey will have in a year or so.

I think you are very nasty to even hint such things when you know very well that England andFrance are coming in on our side in no time and

Why, Scarlett! You must have been reading a newspaper! Im surprised at you. Dont do itagain. It addles womens brains. For your information, I was in England, not a month ago, and Illtell you this. England will never help the Confederacy. England never bets on the underdog. Thatswhy shes England. Besides, the fat Dutch woman who is sitting on the throne is a God-fearingsoul and she doesnt approve of slavery. Let the English mill workers starve because they cant getour cotton but never, never strike a blow for slavery. And as for France, that weak imitation ofNapoleon is far too busy establishing the French in Mexico to be bothered with us. In fact hewelcomes this war, because it keeps us too busy to run his troops out of Mexico. ... No, Scarlett,the idea of assistance from abroad is just a newspaper invention to keep up the morale of theSouth. The Confederacy is doomed. Its living on its hump now, like the camel, and even thelargest of humps arent inexhaustible. I give myself about six months more of blockading and thenIm through. After that, it will be too risky. And Ill sell my boats to some foolish Englishman whothinks he can slip them through. But one way or the other, its not bothering me. Ive made moneyenough, and its in English banks and in gold. None of this worthless paper for me.

As always when he spoke, he sounded so plausible. Other people might call his utterancestreachery but, to Scarlett, they always rang with common sense and truth. And she knew that thiswas utterly wrong, knew she should be shocked and infuriated. Actually she was neither, but shecould pretend to be. It made her feel more respectable and ladylike.

I think what Dr. Meade wrote about was right, Captain Butler. The only way to redeem yourselfis to enlist after you sell your boats. Youre a West Pointer and

You talk like a Baptist preacher making a recruiting speech. Suppose I dont want to redeem myself? Why should I fight to uphold the system that cast me out? I shall take pleasure in seeing itsmashed.

I never heard of any system, she said crossly.

No? And yet you are a part of it, like I was, and Ill wager you dont like it any more than I did.

Well, why am I the black sheep of the Butler family? For this reason and no otherI didntconform to Charleston and I couldnt. And Charleston is the South, only intensified. I wonder ifyou realize yet what a bore it is? So many things that one must do because theyve always beendone. So many things, quite harmless, that one must not do for the same reason. So many thingsthat annoyed me by their senselessness. Not marrying the young lady, of whom you have probablyheard, was merely the last straw. Why should I marry a boring fool, simply because an accidentprevented me from getting her home before dark? And why permit her wild-eyed brother to shootand kill me, when I could shoot straighter? If I had been a gentleman, of course, I would have lethim kill me and that would have wiped the blot from the Butler escutcheon. ButI like to live.

And so Ive lived and Ive had a good time. ... When I think of my brother, living among the sacredcows of Charleston, and most reverent toward them, and remember his stodgy wife and his SaintCecilia Balls and his everlasting rice fieldsthen I know the compensation for breaking with thesystem. Scarlett, our Southern way of living is as antiquated as the feudal system of the MiddleAges. The wonder is that its lasted as long as it has. It had to go and its going now. And yet youexpect me to listen to orators like Dr. Meade who tell me our Cause is just and holy? And get soexcited by the roll of drums that Ill grab a musket and rush off to Virginia to shed my blood forMarse Robert? What kind of a fool do you think I am? Kissing the rod that chastised me is not inmy line. The South and I are even now. The South threw me out to starve once. I havent starved,and I am making enough money out of the Souths death throes to compensate me for my lostbirthright.

I think you are vile and mercenary, said Scarlett, but her remark was automatic. Most of whathe was saying went over her head, as did any conversation that was not personal. But part of itmade sense. There were such a lot of foolish things about life among nice people. Having topretend that her heart was in the grave when it wasnt. And how shocked everybody had beenwhen she danced at the bazaar. And the infuriating way people lifted their eyebrows every time shedid or said anything the least bit different from what every other young woman did and said. Butstill, she was jarred at hearing him attack the very traditions that irked her most. She had lived toolong among people who dissembled politely not to feel disturbed at hearing her own thoughts putinto words.

Mercenary? No, Im only farsighted. Though perhaps that is merely a synonym for mercenary.

At least, people who were not as farsighted as I will call it that. Any loyal Confederate who had athousand dollars in cash in 1861 could have done what I did, but how few were mercenary enoughto take advantage of their opportunities! As for instance, right after Fort Sumter fell and before theblockade was established, I bought up several thousand bales of cotton at dirt-cheap prices and ranthem to England. They are still there in warehouses in Liverpool. Ive never sold them. Imholding them until the English mills have to have cotton and will give me any price I ask. Iwouldnt be surprised if I got a dollar a pound.

Youll get a dollar a pound when elephants roost in trees!

Ill believe Ill get it. Cotton is at seventy-two cents a pound already. Im going to be a richman when this war is over, Scarlett, because I was farsightedpardon me, mercenary. I told youonce before that there were two times for making big money, one in the upbuilding of a countryand the other in its destruction. Slow money on the upbuilding, fast money in the crack-up.

Remember my words. Perhaps they may be of use to you some day.

I do appreciate good advice so much, said Scarlett, with all the sarcasm she could muster.

But I dont need your advice. Do you think Pa is a pauper? Hes got all the money Ill ever needand then I have Charles property besides.

I imagine the French aristocrats thought practically the same thing until the very moment whenthey climbed into the tumbrils.

Frequently Rhett pointed out to Scarlett the inconsistency of her wearing black mourning clotheswhen she was participating in all social activities. He liked bright colors and Scarletts funeraldresses and the crpe veil that hung from her bonnet to her heels both amused him and offendedhim. But she clung to her dull black dresses and her veil, knowing that if she changed them forcolors without waiting several more years, the town would buzz even more than it was alreadybuzzing. And besides, how would she ever explain to her mother?

Rhett said frankly that the crpe veil made her look like a crow and the black dresses added tenyears to her age. This ungallant statement sent her flying to the mirror to see if she really did looktwenty-eight instead of eighteen.

I should think youd have more pride than to try to look like Mrs. Merriwether, he taunted.

And better taste than to wear that veil to advertise a grief Im sure you never felt. Ill lay a wagerwith you. Ill have that bonnet and veil off your head and a Paris creation on it within twomonths.

Indeed, no, and dont lets discuss it any further, said Scarlett, annoyed by his reference toCharles. Rhett, who was preparing to leave for Wilmington for another trip abroad, departed with agrin on his face.

One bright summer morning some weeks later, he reappeared with a brightly trimmed hatbox inhis hand and, after finding that Scarlett was alone in the house, he opened it. Wrapped in layers oftissue was a bonnet, a creation that made her cry: Oh, the darling thing! as she reached for it.

Starved for the sight, much less the touch, of new clothes, it seemed the loveliest bonnet she hadever seen. It was of dark-green taffeta, lined with water silk of a pale-jade color. The ribbons thattied under the chin were as wide as her hand and they, too, were pale green. And, curled about thebrim of this confection was the perkiest of green ostrich plumes.

Put it on, said Rhett, smiling.

She flew across the room to the mirror and plopped it on her head, pushing back her hair toshow her earrings and tying the ribbon under her chin.

How do I look? she cried, pirouetting for his benefit and tossing her head so that the plumedanced. But she knew she looked pretty even before she saw confirmation in his eyes. She looked attractively saucy and the green of the lining made her eyes dark emerald and sparkling.

Oh, Rhett, whose bonnet is it? Ill buy it. Ill give you every cent Ive got for it.

Its your bonnet, he said. Who else could wear that shade of green? Dont you think I carriedthe color of your eyes well in my mind?

Did you really have it trimmed just for me?

Yes, and theres Rue de la Paix on the box, if that means anything to you.

It meant nothing to her, smiling at her reflection in the mirror. Just at this moment, nothingmattered to her except that she looked utterly charming in the first pretty hat she had put on herhead in two years. What she couldnt do with this hat! And then her smile faded.

Dont you like it?

Oh, its a dream but Oh, I do hate to have to cover this lovely green with crpe and dye thefeather black.

He was beside her quickly and his deft fingers untied the wide bow under her chin. In a momentthe hat was back in its box.

What are you doing? You said it was mine.

But not to change to a mourning bonnet. I shall find some other charming lady with green eyeswho appreciates my taste.

Oh, you shant! Ill die if I dont have it! Oh, please, Rhett, dont be mean! Let me have it.

And turn it into a fright like your other hats? No.

She clutched at the box. That sweet thing that made her look so young and enchanting to begiven to some other girl? Oh, never! For a moment she thought of the horror of Pitty and Melanie.

She thought of Ellen and what she would say, and she shivered. But vanity was stronger.

I wont change it. I promise. Now, do let me have it.

He gave her the box with a slightly sardonic smile and watched her while she put it on again andpreened herself.

How much is it? she asked suddenly, her face falling. I have only fifty dollars but next month

It would cost about two thousand dollars, Confederate money, he said with a grin at herwoebegone expression.

Oh, dear Well, suppose I give you the fifty now and then when I get

I dont want any money for it, he said, Its a gift. Scarletts mouth dropped open. The linewas so closely, so carefully drawn where gifts from men were concerned.

Candy and flowers, dear, Ellen had said time and again, and perhaps a book of poetry or analbum or a small bottle of Florida water are the only things a lady may accept from a gentleman.

Never, never any expensive gift, even from your fianc. And never any gift of jewelry or wearingapparel, not even gloves or handkerchiefs. Should you accept such gifts, men would know you were no lady and would try to take liberties.

Oh, dear, thought Scarlett, looking first at herself in the mirror and then at Rhetts unreadableface. I simply cant tell him I wont accept it. Its too darling. IdId almost rather he took aliberty, if it was a very small one. Then she was horrified at herself for having such a thought andshe turned pink.

IllIll give you the fifty dollars

If you do I will throw it in the gutter. Or, better still buy masses for your soul. Im sure yoursoul could do with a few masses.

She laughed unwillingly, and the laughing reflection under the green brim decided her instantly.

Whatever are you trying to do to me?

Im tempting you with fine gifts until your girlish ideals are quite worn away and you are at mymercy, he said.  Accept only candy and flowers from gentlemen, dearie,  he mimicked, andshe burst into a giggle.

You are a clever, black-hearted wretch, Rhett Butler, and you know very well this bonnets toopretty to be refused.

His eyes mocked her, even while they complimented her beauty.

Of course, you can tell Miss Pitty that you gave me a sample of taffeta and green silk and drewa picture of the bonnet and I extorted fifty dollars from you for it.

No. I shall say one hundred dollars and shell tell everybody in town and everybody will begreen with envy and talk about my extravagance. But Rhett, you mustnt bring me anything else soexpensive. Its awfully kind of you, but I really couldnt accept anything else.

Indeed? Well, I shall bring you presents so long as it pleases me and so long as I see things thatwill enhance your charms. I shall bring you dark-green watered silk for a frock to match thebonnet. And I warn you that I am not kind. I am tempting you with bonnets and bangles andleading you into a pit. Always remember I never do anything without reason and I never giveanything without expecting something in return. I always get paid.

His black eyes sought her face and traveled to her lips. Scarlett cast down her eyes, excitementfilling her. Now, he was going to try to take liberties, just as Ellen predicted. He was going to kissher, or try to kiss her, and she couldnt quite make up her flurried mind which it should be. If sherefused, he might jerk the bonnet right off her head and give it to some other girl. On the otherhand, if she permitted one chaste peck, he might bring her other lovely presents in the hope ofgetting another kiss. Men set such a store by kisses, though Heaven alone knew why. And lots oftimes, after one kiss they fell completely in love with a girl and made most entertaining spectaclesof themselves, provided the girl was clever and withheld her kisses after the first one. It would beexciting to have Rhett Butler in love with her and admitting it and begging for a kiss or a smile.

Yes, she would let him kiss her.

But he made no move to kiss her. She gave him a sidelong glance from under her lashes andmurmured encouragingly.

So you always get paid, do you? And what do you expect to get from me?

That remains to be seen.

Well, if you think Ill marry you to pay for the bonnet, I wont, she said daringly and gave herhead a saucy flirt that set the plume to bobbing.

His white teeth gleamed under his little mustache.

Madam, you flatter yourself, I do not want to marry you or anyone else. I am not a marryingman.

Indeed! she cried, taken aback and now determined that he should take some liberty. I donteven intend to kiss you, either.

Then why is your mouth all pursed up in that ridiculous way?

Oh! she cried as she caught a glimpse of herself and saw that her red lips were indeed in theproper pose for a kiss. Oh! she cried again, losing her temper and stamping her foot. You arethe horridest man I have ever seen and I dont care if I never lay eyes on you again!

If you really felt that way, youd stamp on the bonnet. My, what a passion you are in and itsquite becoming, as you probably know. Come, Scarlett, stamp on the bonnet to show me what youthink of me and my presents.

Dont you dare touch this bonnet, she said, clutching it by the bow and retreating. He cameafter her, laughing softly and took her hands in his.

Oh, Scarlett, you are so young you wring my heart, he said. And I shall kiss you, as youseem to expect it, and leaning down carelessly, his mustache just grazed her cheek. Now, do youfeel that you must slap me to preserve the proprieties?

Her lips mutinous, she looked up into his eyes and saw so much amusement in their dark depthsthat she burst into laughter. What a tease he was and how exasperating! If he didnt want to marryher and didnt even want to kiss her, what did he want? If he wasnt in love with her, why did hecall so often and bring her presents?

Thats better, he said. Scarlett, Im a bad influence on you and if you have any sense you willsend me packingif you can. Im very hard to get rid of. But Im bad for you.

Are you?

Cant you see it? Ever since I met you at the bazaar, your career has been most shocking andIm to blame for most of it. Who encouraged you to dance? Who forced you to admit that youthought our glorious Cause was neither glorious nor sacred? Who goaded you into admitting thatyou thought men were fools to die for high-sounding principles? Who has aided you in giving theold ladies plenty to gossip about? Who is getting you out of mourning several years too soon? Andwho, to end all this, has lured you into accepting a gift which no lady can accept and still remain alady?

You flatter yourself, Captain Butler. I havent done anything so scandalous and Id have doneeverything you mentioned without your aid anyway.

I doubt that, he said and his face went suddenly quiet and somber. Youd still be the brokenheartedwidow of Charles Hamilton and famed for your good deeds among the wounded.

Eventually, however

But she was not listening, for she was regarding herself pleasedly in the mirror again, thinkingshe would wear the bonnet to the hospital this very afternoon and take flowers to the convalescentofficers.

That there was truth in his last words did not occur to her. She did not see that Rhett had priedopen the prison of her widowhood and set her free to queen it over unmarried girls when her daysas a belle should have been long past. Nor did she see that under his influence she had come a longway from Ellens teachings. The change had been so gradual, the flouting of one small conventionseeming to have no connection with the flouting of another, and none of them any connection withRhett. She did not realize that, with his encouragement, she had disregarded many of the sternestinjunctions of her mother concerning the proprieties, forgotten the difficult lessons in being a lady.

She only saw that the bonnet was the most becoming one she ever had, that it had not cost her apenny and that Rhett must be in love with her, whether he admitted it or not. And she certainlyintended to find a way to make him admit it.

The next day, Scarlett was standing in front of the mirror with a comb in her hand and her mouthfull of hairpins, attempting a new coiffure which Maybelle, fresh from a visit to her husband inRichmond, had said was the rage at the Capital. It was called Cats, Rats and Mice and presentedmany difficulties. The hair was parted in the middle and arranged in three rolls of graduating sizeon each side of the head, the largest, nearest the part, being the cat. The cat and the rat wereeasy to fix but the mice kept slipping out of her hairpins in an exasperating manner. However,she was determined to accomplish it, for Rhett was coming to supper and he always noticed andcommented upon any innovation of dress or hair.

As she struggled with her bushy, obstinate locks, perspiration beading her forehead, she heardlight running feet in the downstairs hall and knew that Melanie was home from the hospital. As sheheard her fly up the stairs, two at a time, she paused, hairpin in mid-air, realizing that somethingmust be wrong, for Melanie always moved as decorously as a dowager. She went to the door andthrew it open, and Melanie ran in, her face flushed and frightened, looking like a guilty child.

There were tears on her cheeks, her bonnet was hanging on her neck by the ribbons and herhoops swaying violently. She was clutching something in her hand, and the reek of heavy cheapperfume came into the room with her.

Oh, Scarlett! she cried, shutting the door and sinking on the bed. Is Auntie home yet? Sheisnt? Oh, thank the Lord! Scarlett, Im so mortified I could die! I nearly swooned and, Scarlett,Uncle Peter is threatening to tell Aunt Pitty!

Tell what?

That I was talking to thatto MissMrs. Melanie fanned her hot face with herhandkerchief. That woman with red hair, named Belle Watling!

Why, Melly! cried Scarlett, so shocked she could only stare.

Belle Watling was the red-haired woman she had seen on the street the first day she came toAtlanta and by now, she was easily the most notorious woman in town. Many prostitutes hadflocked into Atlanta, following the soldiers, but Belle stood out above the rest, due to her flaminghair and the gaudy, overly fashionable dresses she wore. She was seldom seen on Peachtree Streetor in any nice neighborhood, but when she did appear respectable women made haste to cross thestreet to remove themselves from her vicinity. And Melanie had been talking with her. No wonderUncle Peter was outraged.

I shall die if Aunt Pitty finds out! You know shell cry and tell everybody in town and Ill bedisgraced, sobbed Melanie. And it wasnt my fault. II couldnt run away from her. It wouldhave been so rude. Scarlett, II felt sorry for her. Do you think Im bad for feeling that way?

But Scarlett was not concerned with the ethics of the matter. Like most innocent and well-bredyoung women, she had a devouring curiosity about prostitutes.

What did she want? What does she talk like?

Oh, she used awful grammar but I could see she was trying so hard to be elegant, poor thing. Icame out of the hospital and Uncle Peter and the carriage werent waiting, so I thought Id walkhome. And when I went by the Emersons yard, there she was hiding behind the hedge! Oh, thankHeaven, the Emersons are in Macon! And she said, Please, Mrs. Wilkes, do speak a minute withme. I dont know how she knew my name. I knew I ought to run as hard as I could butwell,Scarlett, she looked so sad andwell, sort of pleading. And she had on a black dress and blackbonnet and no paint and really looked decent but for that red hair. And before I could answer shesaid, I know I shouldnt speak to you but I tried to talk to that old peahen, Mrs. Elsing, and she ranme away from the hospital.

Did she really call her a peahen? said Scarlett pleasedly and laughed.

Oh, dont laugh. It isnt funny. It seems that Missthis woman, wanted to do something for thehospitalcan you imagine it? She offered to nurse every morning and, of course, Mrs. Elsing musthave nearly died at the idea and ordered her out of the hospital. And then she said, I want to dosomething, too. Aint I a Confedrut, good as you?And, Scarlett, I was right touched at her wantingto help. You know, she cant be all bad if she wants to help the Cause. Do you think Im bad to feelthat way?

For Heavens sake, Melly, who cares if youre bad? What else did she say?

She said shed been watching the ladies go by to the hospital and thought I hadaa kindface and so she stopped me. She had some money and she wanted me to take it and use it for thehospital -and not tell a soul where it came from. She said Mrs. Elsing wouldnt let it be used if sheknew what kind of money it was. What kind of money! Thats when I thought Id swoon! And Iwas so upset and anxious to get away, I just said: Oh, yes, indeed, how sweet of you or somethingidiotic, and she smiled and said: Thats right Christian of you and shoved this duty handkerchiefinto my hand. Ugh, can you smell the perfume?

Melanie held out a mans handkerchief, soiled and highly perfumed, in which some coins wereknotted.

She was saying thank you and something about bringing me some money every week and justthen Uncle Peter drove up and saw me! Melly collapsed into tears and laid her head on the pillow.

And when he saw who was with me, heScarlett, he hollered at me! Nobody has ever hollered atme before in my whole life. And he said. You git in dis ayah cahige dis minute! Of course, I did,and all the way home he blessed me out and wouldnt let me explain and said he was going to tellAunt Pitty. Scarlett, do go down and beg him not to tell her. Perhaps he will listen to you. It willkill Auntie if she knows I ever even looked that woman in the face. Will you?

Yes, I will. But lets see how much money is in here. It feels heavy.

She untied the knot and a handful of gold coins rolled out on the bed.

Scarlett, theres fifty dollars here! And in gold! cried Melanie, awed, as she counted the brightpieces. Tell me, do you think its all right to use this kindwell, money madeerthis way forthe boys? Dont you think that maybe God will understand that she wanted to help and wont careif it is tainted? When I think of how many things the hospital needs

But Scarlett was not listening. She was looking at the dirty handkerchief, and humiliation andfury were filling her. There was a monogram in the corner in which were the initials R. K. B. Inher top drawer was a handkerchief just like this, one that Rhett Butler had lent her only yesterdayto wrap about the stems of wild flowers they had picked. She had planned to return it to him whenhe came to supper tonight.

So Rhett consorted with that vile Watling creature and gave her money. That was where thecontribution to the hospital came from. Blockade gold. And to think that Rhett would have the gallto look a decent woman in the face after being with that creature! And to think that she could havebelieved he was in love with her! This proved he couldnt be.

Bad women and all they involved were mysterious and revolting matters to her. She knew thatmen patronized these women for purposes which no lady should mentionor, if she did mentionthem, in whispers and by indirection and euphemism. She had always thought that only commonvulgar men visited such women. Before this moment, it had never occurred to her that nice menthat is, men she met at nice homes and with whom she dancedcould possibly do such things. Itopened up an entirely new field of thought and one that was horrifying. Perhaps all men did this! Itwas bad enough that they forced their wives to go through such indecent performances but toactually seek out low women and pay them for such accommodation! Oh, men were so vile, andRhett Butler was the worst of them all!

She would take this handkerchief and fling it in his face and show him the door and never, neverspeak to him again. But no, of course she couldnt do that. She could never, never let him knowshe even realized that bad women existed, much less that he visited them. A lady could never dothat.

Oh, she thought in fury. If I just wasnt a lady, what wouldnt I tell that varmint!

And, crumbling the handkerchief in her hand, she went down the stairs to the kitchen in searchof Uncle Peter. As she passed the stove, she shoved the handkerchief into the flames and withimpotent anger watched it burn.

Chapter 14

HOPE WAS ROLLING HIGH in every Southern heart as the summer of 1863 came in. Despiteprivation and hardships, despite food speculators and kindred scourges, despite death and sicknessand suffering which had now left their mark on nearly every family, the South was again sayingOne more victory and the war is over, saying it with even more happy assurance than in thesummer before. The Yankees were proving a hard nut to crack but they were cracking at last.

Christmas of 1862 had been a happy one for Atlanta, for the whole South. The Confederacy hadscored a smashing victory at Fredericksburg and the Yankee dead and wounded were counted inthe thousands. There was universal rejoicing in that holiday season, rejoicing and thankfulness thatthe tide was turning. The army in butternut were now seasoned fighters, their generals had proventheir mettle, and everyone knew that when the campaign reopened in the spring, the Yankeeswould be crushed for good and all.

Spring came and the fighting recommenced. May came and the Confederacy won another greatvictory at Chancellorsville. The South roared with elation.

Closer at home, a Union cavalry dash into Georgia had been turned into a Confederate triumph.

Folks were still laughing and slapping each other on the back and saying: Yes, sir! When oldNathan Bedford Forrest gets after them, they better git! Late in April, Colonel Straight andeighteen hundred Yankee cavalry had made a surprise raid into Georgia, aiming at Rome, only alittle more than sixty miles north of Atlanta. They had ambitious plans to cut the vitally importantrailroad between Atlanta and Tennessee and then swing southward into Atlanta to destroy thefactories and the war supplies concentrated there in that key city of the Confederacy.

It was a bold stroke and it would have cost the South dearly, except for Forrest. With only one-third as many menbut what men and what riders!he had started after them, engaged thembefore they even reached Rome, harassed them day and night and finally captured the entire force!

The reached Atlanta almost simultaneously with the news of the victory atChancellorsvi(news) lle, and the town fairly rocked with exultation and with laughter. Chancellorsvillemight be a more important victory but the capture of Streights raiders made the Yankees positivelyridiculous.

No, sir, theyd better not fool with old Forrest, Atlanta said gleefully as the story was told overand over.

The tide of the Confederacys fortune was running strong and full now, sweeping the peoplejubilantly along on its flood. True, the Yankees under Grant had been besieging Vicksburg sincethe middle of May. True, the South had suffered a sickening loss when Stonewall Jackson had beenfatally wounded at Chancellorsville. True, Georgia had lost one of her bravest and most brilliantsons when General T. R. R. Cobb had been killed at Fredericksburg. But the Yankees just couldntstand any more defeats like Fredericksburg and Chancellorsville. Theyd have to give in, and thenthis cruel war would be over.

The first days of July came and with them the rumor, later confirmed by dispatches, that Leewas marching into Pennsylvania. Lee in the enemys territory! Lee forcing battle! This was the last fight of the war!

Atlanta was wild with excitement, pleasure and a hot thirst for vengeance. Now the Yankeeswould know what it meant to have the war carried into their own country. Now theyd know whatit meant to have fertile fields stripped, horses and cattle stolen, houses burned, old men and boysdragged off to prison and women and children turned out to starve.

Everyone knew what the Yankees had done in Missouri, Kentucky, Tennessee and Virginia.

Even small children could recite with hate and fear the horrors the Yankees had inflicted upon theconquered territory. Already Atlanta was full of refugees from east Tennessee, and the town hadheard firsthand stories from them of what suffering they had gone through. In that section, theConfederate sympathizers were in the minority and the hand of war fell heavily upon them, as itdid on all the border states, neighbor informing against neighbor and brother killing brother. Theserefugees cried out to see Pennsylvania one solid sheet of flame, and even the gentlest of old ladieswore expressions of grim pleasure.

But when the trickled back that Lee had issued orders that no private property in Pennsylvaniashouldbe(news) touched, that looting would be punished by death and that the army wouldpay for every article it requisitionedthen it needed all the reverence the General had earned tosave his popularity. Not turn the men loose in the rich storehouses of that prosperous state? Whatwas General Lee thinking of? And our boys so hungry and needing shoes and clothes and horses!

A hasty note from Darcy Meade to the doctor, the only first-hand information Atlanta receivedduring those first days of July, was passed from hand to hand, with mounting indignation.

Pa, could you manage to get me a pair of boots? Ive been barefooted for two weeks now and Idont see any prospects of getting another pair. If I didnt have such big feet I could get them offdead Yankees like the other boys, but Ive never yet found a Yankee whose feet were near as big asmine. If you can get me some, dont mail them. Somebody would steal them on the way and Iwouldnt blame them. Put Phil on the train and send him up with them. Ill write you soon, wherewell be. Right now I dont know, except that were marching north. Were in Maryland now andeverybody says were going on into Pennsylvania. Pa, I thought that wed give the Yanks a taste of their own medicine but the General says No,and personally I dont care to get shot just for the pleasure of burning some Yanks house. Pa,today we marched through the grandest cornfields you ever saw. We dont have corn like this downhome. Well, I must admit we did a bit of private looting in that corn, for we were all pretty hungryand what the General dont know wont hurt him. But that green corn didnt do us a bit of good.

All the boys have got dysentery anyway, and that corn made it worse. Its easier to walk with a legwound than with dysentery. Pa, do try to manage some boots for me. Im a captain now and acaptain ought to have boots, even if be hasnt got a new uniform or epaulets.

But the army was in Pennsylvaniathat was all that mattered. One more victory and the warwould be over, and then Darcy Meade could have all the boots he wanted, and the boys wouldcome marching home and everybody would be happy again. Mrs. Meades eyes grew wet as shepictured her soldier son home at last, home to stay.

On the third of July, a sudden silence fell on the wires from the north, a silence that lasted till midday of the fourth when fragmentary and garbled reports began to trickle into headquarters inAtlanta. There had been hard fighting in Pennsylvania, near a little town named Gettysburg, a greatbattle with all Lees army massed. The news was uncertain, slow in coming, for the battle had beenfought in the enemys territory and the reports came first through Maryland, were relayed toRichmond and then to Atlanta.

Suspense grew and the beginnings of dread slowly crawled over the town. Nothing was so badas not knowing what was happening. Families with sons at the front prayed fervently that theirboys were not in Pennsylvania, but those who knew their relatives were in the same regiment withDarcy Meade clamped their teeth and said it was an honor for them to be in the big fight thatwould lick the Yankees for good and all.

In Aunt Pittys house, the three women looked into one anothers eyes with fear they could notconceal. Ashley was in Darcys regiment.

On the fifth came evil tidings, not from the North but from the West. Vicksburg had fallen, fallenafter a long and bitter siege, and practically all the Mississippi River, from St. Louis to NewOrleans was in the hands of the Yankees. The Confederacy had been cut in two. At any other time,the news of this disaster would have brought fear and lamentation to Atlanta. But now they couldgive little thought to Vicksburg. They were thinking of Lee in Pennsylvania, forcing battle.

Vicksburgs loss would be no catastrophe if Lee won in the East. There lay Philadelphia, NewYork, Washington. Their capture would paralyze the North and more than cancel off the defeat onthe Mississippi.

The hours dragged by and the black shadow of calamity brooded over the town, obscuring thehot sun until people looked up startled into the sky as if incredulous that it was clear and blueinstead of murky and heavy with scudding clouds. Everywhere, women gathered in knots, huddledin groups on front porches, on sidewalks, even in the middle of the streets, telling each other thatno news is good news, trying to comfort each other, trying to present a brave appearance. Buthideous rumors that Lee was killed, the battle lost, and enormous casualty lists coming in, fled upand down the quiet streets like darting bats. Though they tried not to believe, wholeneighborhoods, swayed by panic, rushed to town, to the newspapers, to headquarters, pleading fornews, any news, even bad news.

Crowds formed at the depot, hoping for news from incoming trains, at the telegraph office, infront of the harried headquarters, before the locked doors of the newspapers. They were oddly stillcrowds, crowds that quietly grew larger and larger. There was no talking. Occasionally an oldmans treble voice begged for news, and instead of inciting the crowd to babbling it onlyintensified the hush as they heard the oft-repeated: Nothing on the wires yet from the Northexcept that theres been fighting. The fringe of women on foot and in carriages grew greater andgreater, and the heat of the close-packed bodies and dust rising from restless feet were suffocating.

The women did not speak, but their pale set faces pleaded with a mute eloquence that was louderthan wailing.

There was hardly a house in town that had not sent away a son, a brother, a father, a lover, ahusband, to this battle. They all waited to hear the news that death had come to their homes. Theyexpected death. They did not expect defeat. That thought they dismissed. Their men might be dying, even now, on the sun-parched grass of the Pennsylvania hills. Even now the Southern ranksmight be falling like grain before a hailstorm, but the Cause for which they fought could never fall.

They might be dying in thousands but, like the fruit of the dragons teeth, thousands of fresh menin gray and butternut with the Rebel yell on their lips would spring up from the earth to take theirplaces. Where these men would come from, no one knew. They only knew, as surely as they knewthere was a just and jealous God in Heaven, that Lee was miraculous and the Army of Virginiainvincible.

Scarlett, Melanie and Miss Pittypat sat in front of the Daily Examiner office in the carriage withthe top back, sheltered beneath their parasols. Scarletts hands shook so that her parasol wobbledabove her head, Pitty was so excited her nose quivered in her round face like a rabbits, butMelanie sat as though carved of stone, her dark eyes growing larger and larger as time went by.

She made only one remark in two hours, as she took a vial of smelling salts from her reticule andhanded it to her aunt, the only time she had ever spoken to her, in her whole life, with anything buttenderest affection.

Take this, Auntie, and use it if you feel faint. I warn you if you do faint youll just have to faintand let Uncle Peter take you home, for Im not going to leave this place till I hear abouttill Ihear. And Im not going to let Scarlett leave me, either.

Scarlett had no intention of leaving, no intention of placing herself where she could not have thefirst news of Ashley. No, even if Miss Pitty died, she wouldnt leave this spot. Somewhere, Ashleywas fighting, perhaps dying, and the newspaper office was the only place where she could learn thetruth.

She looked about the crowd, picking out friends and neighbors, Mrs. Meade with her bonnetaskew and her arm though that of fifteen-year-old Phil; the Misses McLure trying to make theirtrembling upper lips cover their buck teeth; Mrs. Elsing, erect as a Spartan mother, betraying herinner turmoil only by the straggling gray locks that hung from her chignon; and Fanny Elsingwhite as a ghost (Surely Fanny wouldnt be so worried about her brother Hugh. Had she a realbeau at the front that no one suspected?) Mrs. Merriwether sat in her carriage patting Maybelleshand. Maybelle looked so very pregnant it was a disgrace for her to be out in public, even if shedid have her shawl carefully draped over her. Why should she be so worried? Nobody had heardthat the Louisiana troops were in Pennsylvania. Probably her hairy little Zouave was safe inRichmond this very minute.

There was a movement on the outskirts of the crowd and those on foot gave way as Rhett Butlercarefully edged his horse toward Aunt Pittys carriage. Scarlett thought: Hes got courage, cominghere at this time when it wouldnt take anything to make this mob tear him to pieces because heisnt in uniform. As he came nearer, she thought she might be the first to rend him. How dared hesit there on that fine horse, in shining boots and handsome white linen suit so sleek and well fed,smoking an expensive cigar, when Ashley and all the other boys were fighting the Yankees,barefooted, sweltering in the heat, hungry, their bellies rotten with disease?

Bitter looks were thrown at him as he came slowly through the press. Old men growled in theirbeards, and Mrs. Merriwether who feared nothing rose slightly in her carriage and said clearly:

Speculator! in a tone that made the word the foulest and most venomous of epithets. He paid noheed to anyone but raised his hat to Melly and Aunt Pitty and, riding to Scarletts side, leaneddown and whispered: Dont you think this would be the time for Dr. Meade to give us his familiarspeech about victory perching like a screaming eagle on our banners?

Her nerves taut with suspense, she turned on him as swiftly as an angry cat, hot words bubblingto her lips, but he stopped them with a gesture.

I came to tell you ladies, he said loudly, that I have been to headquarters and the firstcasualty lists are coming in.

At these words a hum rose among those near enough to hear his remark, and the crowd surged,ready to turn and run down Whitehall Street toward headquarters.

Dont go, he called, rising in his saddle and holding up his hand. The lists have been sent toboth newspapers and are now being printed. Stay where you are!

Oh, Captain Butler, cried Melly, turning to him with tears in her eyes. How kind of you tocome and tell us! When will they be posted?

They should be out any minute, Madam. The reports have been in the offices for half an hournow. The major in charge didnt want to let that out until the printing was done, for fear the crowdwould wreck the offices trying to get news. Ah! Look!

The side window of the newspaper office opened and a hand was extended, bearing a sheaf oflong narrow galley proofs, smeared with fresh ink and thick with names closely printed. The crowdfought for them, tearing the slips in half, those obtaining them trying to back out through the crowdto read, those behind pushing forward, crying: Let me through!

Hold the reins, said Rhett shortly, swinging to the ground and tossing the bridle to UnclePeter. They saw his heavy shoulders towering above the crowd as he went through, brutallypushing and shoving. In a while he was back, with half a dozen in his hands. He tossed one toMelanie and distributed the others among the ladies in the nearest carriages, the Misses McLure,Mrs. Meade, Mrs. Merriwether, Mrs. Elsing.

Quick, Melly, cried Scarlett, her heart in her throat, exasperation sweeping her as she saw thatMellys hands were shaking so that it was impossible for her to read.

Take it, whispered Melly, and Scarlett snatched it from her. The Ws. Where were the Ws? Oh,there they were at the bottom and all smeared up. White, she read and her voice shook, Wilkens... Winn ... Zebulon ... Oh, Melly, hes not on it! Hes not on it! Oh, for Gods sake, Auntie, Melly,pick up the salts! Hold her up, Melly.

Melly, weeping openly with happiness, steadied Miss Pittys rolling head and held the smellingsalts under her nose. Scarlett braced the fat old lady on the other side, her heart singing with joy.

Ashley was alive. He wasnt even wounded. How good God was to pass him by! HowShe heard a low moan and, turning, saw Fanny Elsing lay her head on her mothers bosom, sawthe casualty list flutter to the floor of the carriage, saw Mrs. Elsings thin lips quiver as shegathered her daughter in her arms and said quietly to the coachman: Home. Quickly. Scarletttook a quick glance at the lists. Hugh Elsing was not listed. Fanny must have had a beau and now he was dead. The crowd made way in sympathetic silence for the Elsings carriage, and after themfollowed the little wicker pony cart of the McLure girls. Miss Faith was driving, her face like arock, and for once, her teeth were covered by her lips. Miss Hope, death in her face, sat erectbeside her, holding her sisters skirt in a tight grasp. They looked like very old women. Theiryoung brother Dallas was their darling and the only relative the maiden ladies had in the world.

Dallas was gone.

Melly! Melly! cried Maybelle, joy in her voice, Ren is safe! And Ashley, too! Oh, thankGod! The shawl had slipped from her shoulders and her condition was most obvious but, foronce, neither she nor Mrs. Merriwether cared. Oh, Mrs. Meade! Ren Her voice changed,swiftly, Melly, look!Mrs. Meade, please! Darcy isnt?

Mrs. Meade was looking down into her lap and she did not raise her head when her name wascalled, but the face of little Phil beside her was an open book that all might read.

There, there, Mother, he said, helplessly. Mrs. Meade, looked up, meeting Melanies eyes.

He wont need those boots now, she said.

Oh, darling! cried Melly, beginning to sob, as she shoved Aunt Pitty onto Scarletts shoulderand scrambled out of the carriage and toward that of the doctors wife.

Mother, youve still got me, said Phil, in a forlorn effort at comforting the white-faced womanbeside him. And if youll just let me, Ill go kill all the Yank

Mrs. Meade clutched his arm as if she would never let it go, said No! in a strangled voice andseemed to choke.

Phil Meade, you hush your mouth! hissed Melanie, climbing in beside Mrs. Meade and takingher in her arms. Do you think itll help your mother to have you off getting shot too? I neverheard anything so silly. Drive us home, quick!

She turned to Scarlett as Phil picked up the reins.

As soon as you take Auntie home, come over to Mrs. Meades. Captain Butler, can you getword to the doctor? Hes at the hospital.

The carriage moved off through the dispersing crowd. Some of the women were weeping withjoy, but most looked too stunned to realize the heavy blows that had fallen upon them. Scarlett benther head over the blurred lists, reading rapidly, to find names of friends. Now that Ashley was safeshe could think of other people. Oh, how long the list was! How heavy the toll from Atlanta, fromall of Georgia.

Good Heavens! CalvertRaiford, Lieutenant. Raif! Suddenly she remembered the day, solong ago, when they had run away together but decided to come home at nightfall because theywere hungry and afraid of the dark.

FontaineJoseph K., private, Little bad-tempered Joe! And Sally hardly over having herbaby!

MunroeLaFayette, Captain. And Lafe had been engaged to Cathleen Calvert. PoorCathleen! Hers had been a double loss, a brother and a sweetheart. But Sallys loss was greatera brother and a husband.

Oh, this was too terrible. She was almost afraid to read further. Aunt Pitty was heaving andsighing on her shoulder and, with small ceremony, Scarlett pushed her over into a comer of thecarriage and continued her reading.

Surely, surelythere couldnt be three Tarleton names on that list. Perhapsperhaps thehurried printer had repeated the name by error. But no. There they were. TarletonBrenton,Lieutenant. TarletonStuart, Corporal. TarletonThomas, private. And Boyd, dead the firstyear of the war, was buried God knew where in Virginia. All the Tarleton boys gone. Tom and thelazy long-legged twins with their love of gossip and their absurd practical jokes and Boyd who hadthe grace of a dancing master and the tongue of a wasp.

She could not read any more. She could not know if any other of those boys with whom she hadgrown up, danced, flirted, kissed were on that list. She wished that she could cry, do something toease the iron fingers that were digging into her throat.

Im sorry, Scarlett, said Rhett. She looked up at him. She had forgotten he was still there.

Many of your friends?

She nodded and struggled to speak: About every family in the Countyand allall three ofthe Tarleton boys.

His face was quiet, almost somber, and there was no mocking in his eyes.

And the end is not yet, he said. These are just the first lists and theyre incomplete. Therellbe a longer list tomorrow. He lowered his voice so that those in the near-by carriages could nothear. Scarlett, General Lee must have lost the battle. I heard at headquarters that he had retreatedback into Maryland.

She raised frightened eyes to his, but her fear did not spring from Lees defeat. Longer casualtylists tomorrow! Tomorrow. She had not thought of tomorrow, so happy was she at first thatAshleys name was not on that list. Tomorrow. Why, right this minute he might be dead and shewould not know it until tomorrow, or perhaps a week from tomorrow.

Oh, Rhett, why do there have to be wars? It would have been so much better for the Yankees topay for the darkiesor even for us to give them the darkies free of charge than to have thishappen.

It isnt the darkies, Scarlett. Theyre just the excuse. Therell always be wars because men lovewars. Women dont, but men doyea, passing the love of women.

His mouth twisted in his old smile and the seriousness was gone from his face. He lifted hiswide Panama hat.

Good-by. Im going to find Dr. Meade. I imagine the irony of me being the one to tell him ofhis sons death will be lost on him, just now. But later, hell probably hate to think that a speculatorbrought the news of a heros death.

Scarlett put Miss Pitty to bed with a toddy, left Prissy and Cookie in attendance and went down the street to the Meade house. Mrs. Meade was upstairs with Phil, waiting her husbands return,and Melanie sat in the parlor, talking in a low voice to a group of sympathetic neighbors. She wasbusy with needle and scissors, altering a mourning dress that Mrs. Elsing had lent to Mrs. Meade.

Already the house was full of the acrid smell of clothes boiling in homemade black dye for, in thekitchen, the sobbing cook was stirring all of Mrs. Meades dresses in the huge wash pot.

How is she? questioned Scarlett softly.

Not a tear, said Melanie. Its terrible when women cant cry. I dont know how men standthings without crying. I guess its because theyre stronger and braver than women. She says shesgoing to Pennsylvania by herself to bring him home. The doctor cant leave the hospital.

It will be dreadful for her! Why cant Phil go?

Shes afraid hell join the army if he gets out of her sight. You know hes so big for his age andtheyre taking them at sixteen now.

One by one the neighbors slipped away, reluctant to be present when the doctor came home, andScarlett and Melanie were left alone, sewing in the parlor. Melanie looked sad but tranquil, thoughtears dropped down on the cloth she held in her hands. Evidently she had not thought that the battlemight still be going on and Ashley perhaps dead at this very moment. With panic in her heart,Scarlett did not know whether to tell Melanie of Rhetts words and have the dubious comfort of hermisery or keep it to herself. Finally she decided to remain quiet. It would never do for Melanie tothink her too worried about Ashley. She thanked God that everyone, Melly and Pitty included, hadbeen too engrossed in her own worries that morning to notice her conduct.

After an interval of silent sewing, they heard sounds outside and, peering through the curtains,they saw Dr. Meade alighting from his horse. His shoulders were sagging and his head bowed untilhis gray beard spread out fanlike on his chest. He came slowly into the house and, laying down hishat and bag, kissed both the girls silently. Then he went tiredly up the stairs. In a moment Philcame down, all long legs and arms and awkwardness. The two girls looked an invitation to jointhem, but he went onto the front porch and, seating himself on the top step, dropped his head onhis cupped palm.

Melly sighed.

Hes mad because they wont let him go fight the Yankees. Fifteen years old! Oh, Scarlett, itwould be Heaven to have a son like that!

And have him get killed, said Scarlett shortly, thinking of Darcy.

It would be better to have a son even if he did get killed than to never have one, said Melanieand gulped. You cant understand, Scarlett, because youve got little Wade, but I Oh, Scarlett, Iwant a baby so bad! I know you think Im horrid to say it right out, but its true and only whatevery woman wants and you know it.

Scarlett restrained herself from sniffing.

If God should will that Ashley should betaken, I suppose I could bear it, though Id rather dieif he died. But God would give me strength to bear it. But I could not bear having him dead andnot havingnot having a child of his to comfort me. Oh, Scarlett, how lucky you are! Though you lost Charlie, you have his son. And if Ashley goes, Ill have nothing. Scarlett, forgive me, butsometimes Ive been so jealous of you

Jealousof me? cried Scarlett, stricken with guilt.

Because you have a son and I havent. Ive even pretended sometimes that Wade was minebecause its so awful not to have a child.

Fiddle-dee-dee! said Scarlett in relief. She cast a quick glance at the slight figure withblushing face bent over the sewing. Melanie might want children but she certainly did not have thefigure for bearing them. She was hardly taller than a twelve-year-old child, her hips were as narrowas a childs and her breasts were very flat. The very thought of Melanie having a child wasrepellent to Scarlett. It brought up too many thoughts she couldnt bear thinking. If Melanie shouldhave a child of Ashleys, it would be as though something were taken from Scarlett that was herown.

Do forgive me for saying that about Wade. You know I love him so. You arent mad at me, areyou?

Dont be silly, said Scarlett shortly. And go out on the porch and do something for Phil. Hescrying.

Chapter 15

THE ARMY, driven back into Virginia, went into winter quarters on the Rapidana tired,depleted army since the defeat at Gettysburgand as the Christmas season approached, Ashleycame home on furlough. Scarlett, seeing him for the first time in more than two years, was frightenedby the violence of her feelings. When she had stood in the parlor at Twelve Oaks and seenhim married to Melanie, she had thought she could never love him with a more heartbreakingintensity than she did at that moment. But now she knew her feelings of that long-past night werethose of a spoiled child thwarted of a toy. Now, her emotions were sharpened by her long dreamsof him, heightened by the repression she had been forced to put on her tongue.

This Ashley Wilkes in his faded, patched uniform, his blond hair bleached tow by summer suns,was a different man from the easy-going, drowsy-eyed boy she had loved to desperation before thewar. And he was a thousand times more thrilling. He was bronzed and lean now, where he hadonce been fair and slender, and the long golden mustache drooping about his mouth, cavalry style,was the last touch needed to make him the perfect picture of a soldier.

He stood with military straightness in his old uniform, his pistol in its worn holster, his batteredscabbard smartly slapping his high boots, his tarnished spurs dully gleamingMajor AshleyWilkes, C.S.A. The habit of command sat upon him now, a quiet air of self-reliance and authority,and grim lines were beginning to emerge about his mouth. There was something new and strangeabout the square set of his shoulders and the cool bright gleam of his eyes. Where he had oncebeen lounging and indolent, he was now as alert as a prowling cat, with the tense alertness of onewhose nerves are perpetually drawn as tight as the strings of a violin. In his eyes, there was afagged, haunted look, and the sunburned skin was tight across the fine bones of his faceher same handsome Ashley, yet so very different.

Scarlett had made her plans to spend Christmas at Tara, but after Ashleys telegram came nopower on earth, not even a direct command from the disappointed Ellen, could drag her away fromAtlanta. Had Ashley intended going to Twelve Oaks, she would have hastened to Tara to be nearhim; but he had written his family to join him in Atlanta, and Mr. Wilkes and Honey and Indiawere already in town. Go home to Tara and miss seeing him, after two long years? Miss the heart-quickening sound of his voice, miss reading in his eyes that he had not forgotten her? Never! Notfor all the mothers in the world.

Ashley came home four days before Christmas, with a group of the County boys also onfurlough, a sadly diminished group since Gettysburg. Cade Calvert was among them, a thin, gauntCade, who coughed continually, two of the Munroe boys, bubbling with the excitement of theirfirst leave since 1861, and Alex and Tony Fontaine, splendidly drunk, boisterous and quarrelsome.

The group had two hours to wait between trains and, as it was taxing the diplomacy of the sobermembers of the party to keep the Fontaines from fighting each other and perfect strangers in thedepot, Ashley brought them all home to Aunt Pittypats.

Youd think theyd had enough fighting in Virginia, said Cade bitterly, as he watched the twobristle like game-cocks over who should be the first to kiss the fluttering and flattered Aunt Pitty.

But no. Theyve been drunk and picking fights ever since we got to Richmond. The provost guardtook them up there and if it hadnt been for Ashleys slick tongue, theyd have spent Christmas injail.

But Scarlett hardly heard a word he said, so enraptured was she at being in the same room withAshley again. How could she have thought during these two years that other men were nice orhandsome or exciting? How could she have even endured hearing them make love to her whenAshley was in the world? He was home again, separated from her only by the width of the parlorrug, and it took all her strength not to dissolve in happy tears every time she looked at him sittingthere on the sofa with Melly on one side and India on the other and Honey hanging over hisshoulder. If only she had the right to sit there beside him, her arm through his! If only she could pathis sleeve every few minutes to make sure he was really there, hold his hand and use hishandkerchief to wipe away her tears of joy. For Melanie was doing all these things, unashamedly.

Too happy to be shy and reserved, she hung on her husbands arm and adored him openly with hereyes, with her smiles, her tears. And Scarlett was too happy to resent this, too glad to be jealous.

Ashley was home at last!

Now and then she put her hand up to her cheek where he had kissed her and felt again the thrillof his lips and smiled at him. He had not kissed her first, of course. Melly had hurled herself intohis arms crying incoherently, holding him as though she would never let him go. And then, Indiaand Honey had hugged him, fairly tearing him from Melanies arms. Then he had kissed his father,with a dignified affectionate embrace that showed the strong quiet feeling that lay between them.

And then Aunt Pitty, who was jumping up and down on her inadequate little feet with excitement.

Finally he turned to her, surrounded by all the boys who were claiming their kisses, and said: Oh,Scarlett! You pretty, pretty thing! and kissed her on the cheek.

With that kiss, everything she had intended to say in welcome took wings. Not until hours later did she recall that he had not kissed her on the lips. Then she wondered feverishly if he would havedone it had she met him alone, bending his tall body over hers, pulling her up on tiptoe, holdingher for a long, long time. And because it made her happy to think so, she believed that he would.

But there would be time for all things, a whole week! Surely she could maneuver to get him aloneand say: Do you remember those rides we used to take down our secret bridle paths? Do youremember how the moon looked that night when we sat on the steps at Tara and you quoted thatpoem? (Good Heavens! What was the name of that poem, anyway?) Do you remember thatafternoon when I sprained my ankle and you carried me home in your arms in the twilight?

Oh, there were so many things she would preface with Do you remember? So many dearmemories that would bring back to him those lovely days when they roamed the County like carefreechildren, so many things that would call to mind the days before Melanie Hamilton entered onthe scene. And while they talked she could perhaps read in his eyes some quickening of emotion,some hint that behind the barrier of husbandly affection for Melanie he still cared, cared aspassionately as on that day of the barbecue when he burst forth with the truth. It did not occur toher to plan just what they would do if Ashley should declare his love for her in unmistakablewords. It would be enough to know that he did care. ... Yes, she could wait, could let Melanie haveher happy hour of squeezing his arm and crying. Her time would come. After all, what did a girllike Melanie know of love?

Darling, you look like a ragamuffin, said Melanie when the first excitement of homecomingwas over. Who did mend your uniform and why did they use blue patches?

I thought I looked perfectly dashing, said Ashley, considering his appearance. Just compareme with those rag-tags over there and youll appreciate me more. Mose mended the uniform and Ithought he did very well, considering that hed never had a needle in his hand before the war.

About the blue cloth, when it comes to a choice between having holes in your britches or patchingthem with pieces of a captured Yankee uniformwell, there just isnt any choice. And as forlooking like a ragamuffin, you should thank your stars your husband didnt come home barefooted.

Last week my old boots wore completely out, and I would have come home with sacks tied on myfeet if we hadnt had the good luck to shoot two Yankee scouts. The boots of one of them fitted meperfectly.

He stretched out his long legs in their scarred high boots for them to admire.

And the boots of the other scout didnt fit me, said Cade. Theyre two sizes too small andtheyre killing me this minute. But Im going home in style just the same.

And the selfish swine wont give them to either of us, said Tony. And theyd fit our small,aristocratic Fontaine feet perfectly. Hells afire, Im ashamed to face Mother in these brogans.

Before the war she wouldnt have let one of our darkies wear them.

Dont worry, said Alex, eyeing Cades boots. Well take them off of him on the train goinghome. I dont mind facing Mother but Im daI mean I dont intend for Dimity Munroe to see mytoes sticking out.

Why, theyre my boots. I claimed them first, said Tony, beginning to scowl at his brother; andMelanie, fluttering with fear at the possibility of one of the famous Fontaine quarrels, interposed and made peace.

I had a full beard to show you girls, said Ashley, ruefully rubbing his face where half-healedrazor nicks still showed. It was a beautiful beard and if I do say it myself, neither Jeb Stuart norNathan Bedford Forrest had handsomer one. But when we got to Richmond, those two scoundrels,indicatingthe Fonta(a) ines, decided that as they were shaving their beards, mine shouldcome off too. They got me down and shaved me, and its a wonder my head didnt come off alongwith the beard. It was only by the intervention of Evan and Cade that my mustache was saved.

Snakes, Mrs. Wilkes! You ought to thank me. Youd never have recognized him and wouldnthave let him in the door, said Alex. We did it to show our appreciation of his talking the provostguard out of putting us in jail. If you say the word, well take the mustache off for you, right now.

Oh, no, thank you! said Melanie hastily, clutching Ashley in a frightened way, for the twoswarthy little men looked capable of any violence. I think its perfectly lovely.

Thats love, said the Fontaines, nodding gravely at each other.

When Ashley went into the cold to see the boys off to the depot in Aunt Pittys carriage, Melaniecaught Scarletts arm.

Isnt his uniform dreadful? Wont my coat be a surprise? Oh, if only I had enough cloth forbritches too!

That coat for Ashley was a sore subject with Scarlett, for she wished so ardently that she and notMelanie were bestowing it as a Christmas gift. Gray wool for uniforms was now almost literallymore priceless than rubies, and Ashley was wearing the familiar homespun. Even butternut wasnow none too plentiful, and many of the soldiers were dressed in captured Yankee uniforms whichhad been turned a dark-brown color with walnut-shell dye. But Melanie, by rare luck, had comeinto possession of enough gray broadcloth to make a coata rather short coat but a coat just thesame. She had nursed a Charleston boy in the hospital and when he died had clipped a lock of hishair and sent it to his mother, along with the scant contents of his pockets and a comfortingaccount of his last hours which made no mention of the torment in which he died. Acorrespondence had sprung up between them and, learning that Melanie had a husband at the front,the mother had sent her the length of gray cloth and brass buttons which she had bought for herdead son. It was a beautiful piece of material, thick and warm and with a dull sheen to itundoubtedly blockade goods and undoubtedly very expensive. It was now in the hands of the tailorand Melanie was hurrying him to have it ready by Christmas morning. Scarlett would have givenanything to be able to provide the rest of the uniform, but the necessary materials were simply notto be had in Atlanta.

She had a Christmas present for Ashley, but it paled in insignificance beside the glory ofMelanies gray coat. It was a small housewife, made of flannel, containing the whole preciouspack of needles Rhett had brought her from Nassau, three of her linen handkerchiefs, obtainedfrom the same source, two spools of thread and a small pair of scissors. But she wanted to give himsomething more personal, something a wife could give a husband, a shirt, a pair of gauntlets, a hat.

Oh, yes, a hat by all means. That little flat-topped forage cap Ashley was wearing lookedridiculous. Scarlett had always hated them. What if Stonewall Jackson had worn one in preference to a slouch felt? That didnt make them any more dignified looking. But the only hats obtainable inAtlanta were crudely made wool hats, and they were tackier than the monkey-hat forage caps.

When she thought of hats, she thought of Rhett Butler. He had so many hats, wide Panamas forsummer, tall beavers for formal occasions, hunting hats, slouch hats of tan and black and blue.

What need had he for so many when her darling Ashley rode in the rain with moisture drippingdown his collar from the back of his cap?

Ill make Rhett give me that new black felt of his, she decided. And Ill put a gray ribbonaround the brim and sew Ashleys wreath on it and it will look lovely.

She paused and thought it might be difficult to get the hat without some explanation. She simplycould not tell Rhett she wanted it for Ashley. He would raise his brows in that nasty way he alwayshad when she even mentioned Ashleys name and, like as not, would refuse to give her the hat.

Well, shed make up some pitiful story about a soldier in the hospital who needed it and Rhett neednever know the truth.

All that afternoon, she maneuvered to be alone with Ashley, even for a few minutes, but Melaniewas beside him constantly, and India and Honey, their pale lashless eyes glowing, followed himabout the house. Even John Wilkes, visibly proud of his son, had no opportunity for quietconversation with him.

It was the same at supper where they all plied him with questions about the war. The war! Whocared about the war? Scarlett didnt think Ashley cared very much for that subject either. He talkedat length, laughed frequently and dominated the conversation more completely than she had everseen him do before, but he seemed to say very little. He told them jokes and funny stories aboutfriends, talked gaily about makeshifts, making light of hunger and long marches in the rain, anddescribed in detail how General Lee had looked when he rode by on the retreat from Gettysburgand questioned: Gentlemen, are you Georgia troops? Well, we cant get along without youGeorgians!

It seemed to Scarlett that he was talking fervishly to keep them from asking questions he did notwant to answer. When she saw his eyes falter and drop before the long, troubled gaze of his father,a faint worry and bewilderment rose in her as to what was hidden in Ashleys heart. But it soonpassed, for there was no room in her mind for anything except a radiant happiness and a drivingdesire to be alone with him.

That radiance lasted until everyone in the circle about the open fire began to yawn, and Mr.

Wilkes and the girls took their departure for the hotel. Then as Ashley and Melanie and Pittypatand Scarlett mounted the stairs, lighted by Uncle Peter, a chill fell on her spirit. Until that momentwhen they stood in the upstairs hall, Ashley had been hers, only hers, even if she had not had aprivate word with him that whole afternoon. But now, as she said good night she saw thatMelanies cheeks were suddenly crimson and she was trembling. Her eyes were on the carpet and,though she seemed overcome with some frightening emotion, she seemed shyly happy. Melaniedid not even look up when Ashley opened the bedroom door, but sped inside. Ashley said goodnight abruptly, and he did not meet Scarletts eyes either.

The door closed behind them, leaving Scarlett open mouthed and suddenly desolate. Ashley was no longer hers. He was Melanies. And as long as Melanie lived, she could go into rooms withAshley and close the doorand close out the rest of the world.

Now Ashley was going away, back to Virginia, back to the long marches in the sleet, to hungrybivouacs in the snow, to pain and hardship and to the risk of all the bright beauty of his goldenhead and proud slender body being blotted out in an instant, like an ant beneath a careless heel.

The past week with its shimmering, dreamlike beauty, its crowded hours of happiness, was gone.

The week had passed swiftly, like a dream, a dream fragrant with the smell of pine boughs andChristmas trees, bright with little candles and home-made tinsel, a dream where minutes flew asrapidly as heartbeats. Such a breathless week when something within her drove Scarlett withmingled pain and pleasure to pack and cram every minute with incidents to remember after he wasgone, happenings which she could examine at leisure in the long months ahead, extracting everymorsel of comfort from themdance, sing, laugh, fetch and carry for Ashley, anticipate his wants,smile when he smiles, be silent when he talks, follow him with your eyes so that each line of hiserect body, each lift of his eyebrows, each quirk of his mouth, will be indelibly printed on yourmindfor a week goes by so fast and the war goes on forever.

She sat on the divan in the parlor, holding her going-away gift for him in her lap, waiting whilehe said good-by to Melanie, praying that when he did come down the stairs he would be alone andshe might be granted by Heaven a few moments alone with him. Her ears strained for sounds fromupstairs, but the house was oddly still, so still that even the sound of her breathing seemed loud.

Aunt Pittypat was crying into her pillows in her room, for Ashley had told her good-by half anhour before. No sounds of murmuring voices or of tears came from behind the closed door ofMelanies bedroom. It seemed to Scarlett that he had been in that room for hours, and she resentedbitterly each moment that he stayed, saying good-by to his wife, for the moments were slipping byso fast and his time was so short.

She thought of all the things she had intended to say to him during this week. But there had beenno opportunity to say them, and she knew now that perhaps she would never have the chance tosay them.

Such foolish little things, some of them: Ashley, you will be careful, wont you? Please dontget your feet wet. You take cold so easily. Dont forget to put a newspaper across your chestunder your shirt. It keeps out the wind so well. But there were other things, more important thingsshe had wanted to say, much more important things she had wanted to hear him say, things she hadwanted to read in his eyes, even if he did not speak them.

So many things to say and now there was no time! Even the few minutes that remained might besnatched away from her if Melanie followed him to the door, to the carriage block. Why hadnt shemade the opportunity during this last week? But always, Melanie was at his side, her eyescaressing him adoringly, always friends and neighbors and relatives were in the house and, frommorning till night, Ashley was never alone. Then, at night, the door of the bedroom closed and hewas alone with Melanie. Never once during these last days had he betrayed to Scarlett by one look,one word, anything but the affection a brother might show a sister or a friend, a lifelong friend. Shecould not let him go away, perhaps forever, without knowing whether he still loved her. Then, evenif he died, she could nurse the warm comfort of his secret love to the end of her days.

After what seemed an eternity of waiting, she heard the sound of his boots in the bedroom aboveand the door opening and closing. She heard him coming down the steps. Alone! Thank God forthat! Melanie must be too overcome by the grief of parting to leave her room. Now she would havehim for herself for a few precious minutes.

He came down the steps slowly, his spurs clinking, and she could hear the slap-slap of his saberagainst his high boots. When he came into the parlor, his eyes were somber. He was trying to smilebut his face was as white and drawn as a man bleeding from an internal wound. She rose as heentered, thinking with proprietary pride that he was the handsomest soldier she had ever seen. Hislong holster and belt glistened and his silver spurs and scabbard gleamed, from the industriouspolishing Uncle Peter had given them. His new coat did not fit very well, for the tailor had beenhurried and some of the seams were awry. The bright new sheen of the gray coat was sadly at variancewith the worn and patched butternut trousers and the scarred boots, but if he had been clothedin silver armor he could not have looked more the shining knight to her.

Ashley, she begged abruptly, may I go to the train with you?

Please dont. Father and the girls will be there. And anyway, Id rather remember you sayinggood-by to me here than shivering at the depot. Theres so much to memories.

Instantly she abandoned her plan. If India and Honey who disliked her so much were to bepresent at the leave taking, she would have no chance for a private word.

Then I wont go, she said. See, Ashley! Ive another present for you.

A little shy, now that the time had come to give it to him, she unrolled the package. It was a longyellow sash, made of thick China silk and edged with heavy fringe. Rhett Butler had brought her ayellow shawl from Havana several months before, a shawl gaudily embroidered with birds andflowers in magenta and blue. During this last week, she had patiently picked out all the embroideryand cut up the square of silk and stitched it into a sash length.

Scarlett, its beautiful! Did you make it yourself? Then Ill value it all the more. Put it on me,my dear. The boys will be green with envy when they see me in the glory of my new coat andsash.

She wrapped the bright lengths about his slender waist, above his belt, and tied the ends in alovers knot. Melanie might have given him his new coat but this sash was her gift, her own secretguerdon for him to wear into battle, something that would make him remember her every time helooked at it. She stood back and viewed him with pride, thinking that even Jeb Stuart with hisflaunting sash and plume could not look so dashing as her cavalier.

Its beautiful, he repeated, fingering the fringe. But I know youve cut up a dress or a shawlto make it. You shouldnt have done it, Scarlett. Pretty things are too hard to get these days.

Oh, Ashley, Id

She had started to say: Id cut up my heart for you to wear if you wanted it, but she finished,Id do anything for you!

Would you? he questioned and some of the somber-ness lifted from his face. Then, theressomething you can do for me, Scarlett, something that will make my mind easier when Im away.

What is it? she asked joyfully, ready to promise prodigies.

Scarlett, will you look after Melanie for me?

Look after Melly?

Her heart sank with bitter disappointment. So this was something beautiful, somethingspectacular! And then anger flared. This moment was her moment with Ashley, hers alone. Andyet, though Melanie was absent, her pale shadow lay between them. How could he bring up hername in their moment of farewell? How could he ask such a thing of her?

He did not notice the disappointment on her face. As of old, his eyes were looking through herand beyond her, at something else, not seeing her at all.

Yes, keep an eye on her, take care of her. Shes so frail and she doesnt realize it. Shell wearherself out nursing and sewing. And shes so gentle and timid. Except for Aunt Pittypat and UncleHenry and you, she hasnt a close relative in the world, except the Burrs in Macon and theyrethird cousins. And Aunt PittyScarlett, you know shes like a child. And Uncle Henry is an oldman. Melanie loves you so much, not just because you were Charlies wife, but becausewell,because youre you and she loves you like a sister. Scarlett, I have nightmares when I think whatmight happen to her if I were killed and she had no one to turn to. Will you promise?

She did not even hear his last request, so terrified was she by those ill-omened words, if I werekilled.

Every day she had read the casualty lists, read them with her heart in her throat, knowing thatthe world would end if anything should happen to him. But always, always, she had an innerfeeling that even if the Confederate Army were entirely wiped out, Ashley would be spared. Andnow he had spoken the frightful words! Goose bumps came out all over her and fear swamped her,a superstitious fear she could not combat with reason. She was Irish enough to believe in secondsight, especially where death premonitions were concerned, and in his wide gray eyes she sawsome deep sadness which she could only interpret as that of a man who has felt the cold finger onhis shoulder, has heard the wail of the Banshee.

You mustnt say it! You mustnt even think it Its bad luck to speak of death! Oh, say a prayer,quickly!

You say it for me and light some candles, too, he said, smiling at the frightened urgency in hervoice.

But she could not answer, so stricken was she by the pictures her mind was drawing, Ashleylying dead in the snows of Virginia, so far away from her. He went on speaking and there was aquality in his voice, a sadness, a resignation, that increased her fear until every vestige of angerand disappointment was blotted out.

Im asking you for this reason, Scarlett I cannot tell what will happen to me or what willhappen to any of us. But when the end comes, I shall be far away from here, even if I am alive, toofar away to look out for Melanie.

Thethe end?

The end of the warand the end of the world.

But Ashley, surely you cant think the Yankees win beat us? All this week youve talked abouthow strong General Lee

All this week Ive talked lies, like all men talk when theyre on furlough. Why should I frightenMelanie and Aunt Pitty before theres any need for them to be frightened? Yes, Scarlett, I think theYankees have us. Gettysburg was the beginning of the end. The people back home dont know ityet. They cant realize how things stand with us, butScarlett, some of my men are barefootednow and the snow is deep in Virginia. And when I see their poor frozen feet, wrapped in rags andold sacks, and I see the blood prints they leave in the snow, and know that Ive got a whole pair ofbootswell, I feel like I should give mine away and be barefooted too.

Oh, Ashley, promise me you wont give them away!

When I see things like that and then look at the Yankeesthen I see the end of everything.

Why, Scarlett, the Yankees are buying soldiers from Europe by the thousands! Most of theprisoners weve taken recently cant even speak English. Theyre Germans and Poles and wildIrishmen who talk Gaelic. But when we lose a man, he cant be replaced. When our shoes wearout, there are no more shoes. Were bottled up, Scarlett. And we cant fight the whole world.

She thought wildly: Let the whole Confederacy crumble in the dust. Let the world end, but youmust not die! I couldnt live if you were dead!

I hope you will not repeat what I have said, Scarlett. I do not want to alarm the others. And, mydear, I would not have alarmed you by saying these things, were it not that I had to explain why Iask you to look after Melanie. Shes so frail and weak and youre so strong, Scarlett. It will be acomfort to me to know that you are together if anything happens to me. You will promise, wontyou?

Oh, yes! she cried, for at that moment, seeing death at his elbow, she would have promisedanything. Ashley, Ashley! I cant let you go away! I simply cant be brave about it!

You must be brave, he said, and his voice changed subtly. It was resonant, deeper, and hiswords fell swiftly as though hurried with some inner urgency. You must be brave. For how elsecan I stand it?

Her eyes sought his face quickly and with joy, wondering if he meant that leaving her wasbreaking his heart, even as it was breaking hers. His face was as drawn as when he came downfrom bidding Melanie good-by, but she could read nothing in his eyes. He leaned down, took herface in his hands, and kissed her lightly on the forehead.

Scarlett! Scarlett! You are so fine and strong and good. So beautiful, not just your sweet face,my dear, but all of you, your body and your mind and your soul.

Oh, Ashley, she whispered happily, thrilling at his words and his touch on her face. Nobodyelse but you ever

I like to think that perhaps I know you better than most people and that I can see beautifulthings buried deep in you that others are too careless and too hurried to notice.

He stopped speaking and his hands dropped from her face, but his eyes still clung to her eyes.

She waited a moment, breathless for him to continue, a-tiptoe to hear him say the magic three words. But they did not come. She searched his face frantically, her lips quivering, for she saw hehad finished speaking.

This second blighting of her hopes was more than heart could bear and she cried Oh! in achildish whisper and sat down, tears stinging her eyes. Then she heard an ominous sound in thedriveway, outside the window, a sound that brought home to her even more sharply the imminenceof Ashleys departure. A pagan hearing the lapping of the waters around Charons boat could nothave felt more desolate. Uncle Peter, muffled in a quilt, was bringing out the carriage to takeAshley to the train.

Ashley said Good-by, very softly, caught up from the table the wide felt hat she had inveigledfrom Rhett and walked into the dark front hall. His hand on the doorknob, he turned and looked ather, a long, desperate look, as if he wanted to carry away with him every detail of her face andfigure. Through a blinding mist of tears she saw his face and with a strangling pain in her throatshe knew that he was going away, away from her care, away from the safe haven of this house, andout of her life, perhaps forever, without having spoken the words she so yearned to hear. Time wasgoing by like a mill race, and now it was too late. She ran stumbling across the parlor and into thehall and clutched the ends of his sash.

Kiss me, she whispered. Kiss me good-by,

His arms went around her gently, and he bent his head to her face. At the first touch of his lipson hers, her arms were about his neck in a strangling grip. For a fleeting immeasurable instant, hepressed her body close to his. Then she felt a sudden tensing of all his muscles. Swiftly, he droppedthe hat to the floor and, reaching up, detached her arms from his neck.

No, Scarlett, no, he said in a low voice, holding her crossed wrists in a grip that hurt.

I love you, she said choking. Ive always loved you. Ive never loved anybody else. I justmarried Charlie to to try to hurt you. Oh, Ashley, I love you so much Id walk every step of theway to Virginia just to be near you! And Id cook for you and polish your boots and groom yourhorse Ashley, say you love me! Ill live on it for the rest of my life!

He bent suddenly to retrieve his hat and she had one glimpse of his face. It was the unhappiestface she was ever to see, a face from which all aloofness had fled. Written on it were his love forand joy that she loved him, but battling them both were shame and despair.

Good-by, he said hoarsely.

The door clicked open and a gust of cold wind swept the house, fluttering the curtains. Scarlettshivered as she watched him run down the walk to the carriage, his saber glinting in the feeblewinter sunlight, the fringe of his sash dancing jauntily.

Chapter 16

JANUARY AND FEBRUARY OF 1864 PASSED, full of cold rains and wild winds, clouded bypervasive gloom and depression. In addition to the defeats at Gettysburg and Vicksburg, the centerof the Southern line had caved. After hard fighting, nearly all of Tennessee was now held by theUnion troops. But even with this loss on the top of the others, the Souths spirit was not broken.

True, grim determination had taken the place of high-hearted hopes, but people could still find asilver lining in the cloud. For one thing, the Yankees had been stoutly repulsed in September whenthey had tried to follow up their victories in Tennessee by an advance into Georgia.

Here in the northwesternmost corner of the state, at Chickamauga, serious fighting had occurredon Georgia soil for the first time since the war began. The Yankees had taken Chattanooga andthen had marched through the mountain passes into Georgia, but they had been driven back withheavy losses.

Atlanta and its railroads had played a big part in making Chickamauga a great victory for theSouth. Over the railroads that led down from Virginia to Atlanta and then northward to Tennessee,General Longstreets corps had been rushed to the scene of the battle. Along the entire route ofseveral hundred miles, the tracks had been cleared and all the available rolling stock in theSoutheast had been assembled for the movement.

Atlanta had watched while train after train rolled through the town, hour after hour, passengercoaches, box cars, flat cars, filled with shouting men. They had come without food or sleep,without their horses, ambulances or supply trains and, without waiting for the rest, they had leapedfrom the trains and into the battle. And the Yankees had been driven out of Georgia, back into Tennessee.

It was the greatest feat of the war, and Atlanta took pride and personal satisfaction in the thoughtthat its railroads had made the victory possible.

But the South had needed the cheering news from Chickamauga to strengthen its morale throughthe winter. No one denied now that the Yankees were good fighters and, at last, they had goodgenerals. Grant was a butcher who did not care how many men he slaughtered for a victory, butvictory he would have. Sheridan was a name to bring dread to Southern hearts. And, then, therewas a man named Sherman who was being mentioned more and more often. He had risen toprominence in the campaigns in Tennessee and the West, and his reputation as a determined andruthless fighter was growing.

None of them, of course, compared with General Lee. Faith in the General and the army wasstill strong. Confidence in ultimate victory never wavered. But the war was dragging out so long.

There were so many dead, so many wounded and maimed for life, so many widowed, so manyorphaned. And there was still a long struggle ahead, which meant more dead, more wounded, morewidows and orphans.

To make matters worse, a vague distrust of those in high places had begun to creep over thecivilian population. Many newspapers were outspoken in their denunciation of President Davishimself and the manner in which he prosecuted the war. There were dissensions within theConfederate cabinet, disagreements between President Davis and his generals. The currency wasfalling rapidly. Shoes and clothing for the army were scarce, ordnance supplies and drugs werescarcer. The railroads needed new cars to take the place of old ones and new iron rails to replacethose torn up by the Yankees. The generals in the field were crying out for fresh troops, and therewere fewer and fewer fresh troops to be had. Worst of all, some of the state governors, GovernorBrown of Georgia among them, were refusing to send state militia troops and arms out of theirborders. There were thousands of able-bodied men in the state troops for whom the army was frantic, but the government pleaded for them in vain.

With the new fall of currency, prices soared again. Beef, pork and butter cost thirty-five dollars apound, flour fourteen hundred dollars a barrel, soda one hundred dollars a pound, tea five hundreddollars a pound. Warm clothing, when it was obtainable at all, had risen to such prohibitive pricesthat Atlanta ladies were lining their old dresses with rags and reinforcing them with newspapers tokeep out the wind. Shoes cost from two hundred to eight hundred dollars a pair, depending onwhether they were made of cardboard or real leather. Ladies now wore gaiters made of their oldwool shawls and cut-up carpets. The soles were made of wood.

The truth was that the North was holding the South in a virtual state of siege, though many didnot realize it. The Yankee gunboats had tightened the mesh at the ports and very few ships werenow able to slip past the blockade.

The South had always lived by selling cotton and buying the things it did not produce, but nowit could neither sell nor buy. Gerald OHara had three years crops of cotton stored under the shednear the gin house at Tara, but little good it did him. In Liverpool it would bring one hundred andfifty thousand dollars, but there was no hope of getting it to Liverpool. Gerald had changed from awealthy man to a man who was wondering how he would feed his family and his negroes throughthe winter.

Throughout the South, most of the cotton planters were in the same fix. With the blockadeclosing tighter and tighter, there was no way to get the Souths money crop to its market inEngland, no way to bring in the necessaries which cotton money had brought in years gone by.

And the agricultural South, waging war with the industrial North, was needing so many thingsnow, things it had never thought of buying in times of peace.

It was a situation made to order for speculators and profiteers, and men were not lacking to takeadvantage of it. As food and clothing grew scarcer and prices rose higher and higher, the publicoutcry against the speculators grew louder and more venomous. In those early days of 1864, nonewspaper could be opened that did not carry scathing editorials denouncing the speculators asvultures and bloodsucking leeches and calling upon the government to put them down with a hardhand. The government did its best, but the efforts came to nothing, for the government was harriedby many things.

Against no one was feeling more bitter than against Rhett Butler. He had sold his boats whenblockading grew too hazardous, and he was now openly engaged in food speculation. The storiesabout him that came back to Atlanta from Richmond and Wilmington made those who hadreceived him in other days writhe with shame.

In spite of all these trials and tribulations, Atlantas ten thousand population had grown todouble that number during the war. Even the blockade had added to Atlantas prestige. From timeimmemorial, the coast cities had dominated the South, commercially and otherwise. But now withthe ports closed and many of the port cities captured or besieged, the Souths salvation dependedupon itself. The interior section was what counted, if the South was going to win the war, andAtlanta was now the center of things. The people of the town were suffering hardship, privation,sickness and death as severely as the rest of the Confederacy; but Atlanta, the city, had gainedrather than lost as a result of the war. Atlanta, the heart of the Confederacy, was still beating full and strong, the railroads that were its arteries throbbing with the never-ending flow of men,munitions and supplies.

In other days, Scarlett would have been bitter about her shabby dresses and patched shoes butnow she did not care, for the one person who mattered was not there to see her. She was happythose two months, happier than she had been in years. Had she not felt the start of Ashleys heartwhen her arms went round his neck? seen that despairing look on his face which was more open anavowal than any words could be? He loved her. She was sure of that now, and this conviction wasso pleasant she could even be kinder to Melanie. She could be sorry for Melanie now, sorry with afaint contempt for her blindness, her stupidity.

When the war is over! she thought When its overthen ...

Sometimes she thought with a small dart of fear: What then? But she put the thought from hermind. When the war was over, everything would be settled, somehow. If Ashley loved her, hesimply couldnt go on living with Melanie.

But then, a divorce was unthinkable; and Ellen and Gerald, staunch Catholics that they were,would never permit her to marry a divorced man. It would mean leaving the Church! Scarlettthought it over and decided that, in a choice between the Church and Ashley, she would chooseAshley. But, oh, it would make such a scandal! Divorced people were under the ban not only of theChurch but of society. No divorced person was received. However, she would dare even that forAshley. She would sacrifice anything for Ashley.

Somehow it would come out all right when the war was over. If Ashley loved her so much, hedfind a way. Shed make him find a way. And with every day that passed, she became more sure inher own mind of his devotion, more certain he would arrange matters satisfactorily when theYankees were finally beaten. Of course, he had said the Yankees had them. Scarlett thought thatwas just foolishness. He had been tired and upset when he said it. But she hardly cared whether theYankees won or not. The thing that mattered was for the war to finish quickly and for Ashley tocome home.

Then, when the sleets of March were keeping everyone indoors, the hideous blow fell. Melanie,her eyes shining with joy, her head ducked with embarrassed pride, told her she was going to havea baby.

Dr. Meade says it will be here in late August or September, she said. Ive thoughtbut Iwasnt sure till today. Oh, Scarlett, isnt it wonderful? Ive so envied you Wade and so wanted ababy. And I was so afraid that maybe I wasnt ever going to have one and, darling, I want adozen!

Scarlett had been combing her hair, preparing for bed, when Melanie spoke and she stopped, thecomb in mid-air.

Dear God! she said and, for a moment, realization did not come. Then there suddenly leapedto her mind the closed door of Melanies bedroom and a knifelike pain went through her, a pain asfierce as though Ashley had been her own husband and had been unfaithful to her. A baby. Ashleysbaby. Oh, how could he, when he loved her and not Melanie?

I know youre surprised, Melanie rattled on, breathlessly. And isnt it too wonderful? Oh,Scarlett, I dont know how I shall ever write Ashley! It wouldnt be so embarrassing if I could tellhim ororwell, not say anything and just let him notice gradually, you know

Dear God! said Scarlett, almost sobbing, as she dropped the comb and caught at the marbletop of the dresser for support.

Darling, dont look like that! You know having a baby isnt so bad. You said so yourself. Andyou mustnt worry about me, though you are sweet to be so upset. Of course, Dr. Meade said I waswas, Melanie blushed, quite narrow but that perhaps I shouldnt have any trouble andScarlett, did you write Charlie and tell him when you found out about Wade, or did your mother doit or maybe Mr. OHara? Oh, dear, if I only had a mother to do it! I just dont see how

Hush! said Scarlett, violently. Hush!

Oh, Scarlett, Im so stupid! Im sorry. I guess all happy people are selfish. I forgot aboutCharlie, just for the moment

Hush! said Scarlett again, fighting to control her face and make her emotions quiet. Never,never must Melanie see or suspect how she felt.

Melanie, the most tactful of women, had tears in her eyes at her own cruelty. How could shehave brought back to Scarlett the terrible memories of Wade being born months after poor Charliewas dead? How could she have been so thoughtless?

Let me help you undress, dearest, she said humbly. And Ill rub your head for you.

You leave me alone, said Scarlett, her face like stone. And Melanie, bursting into tears of self-condemnation, fled the room, leaving Scarlett to a tearless bed, with wounded pride,disillusionment and jealousy for bedfellows.

She thought that she could not live any longer in the same house with the woman who wascarrying Ashleys child, thought that she would go home to Tara, home, where she belonged. Shedid not see how she could ever look at Melanie again and not have her secret read in her face. Andshe arose the next morning with the fixed intention of packing her trunk immediately afterbreakfast. But, as they sat at the table, Scarlett silent and gloomy, Pitty bewildered and Melaniemiserable, a telegram came.

It was to Melanie from Ashleys body servant, Mose.

I have looked everywhere and I cant find him. Must I come home?

No one knew what it meant but the eyes of the three women went to one another, wide withterror, and Scarlett forgot all thoughts of going home. Without finishing their breakfasts they drovedown to telegraph Ashleys colonel, but even as they entered the office, there was a telegram fromhim.

Regret to inform you Major Wilkes missing since scouting expedition three days ago. Will keepyou informed.

It was a ghastly trip home, with Aunt Pitty crying into her handkerchief, Melanie sitting erectand white and Scarlett slumped, stunned in the corner of the carriage. Once in the house, Scarlett stumbled up the stairs to her bedroom and, clutching her Rosary from the table, dropped to herknees and tried to pray. But the prayers would not come. There only fell on her an abysmal fear, acertain knowledge that God had turned His face from her for her sin. She had loved a married manand tried to take him from his wife, and God had punished her by killing him. She wanted to praybut she could not raise her eyes to Heaven. She wanted to cry but the tears would not come. Theyseemed to flood her chest, and they were hot tears that burned under her bosom, but they wouldnot flow.

Her door opened and Melanie entered. Her face was like a heart cut from white paper, framedagainst black hair, and her eyes were wide, like those of a frightened child lost in the dark.

Scarlett, she said, putting out her hands. You must forgive me for what I said yesterday, foryoureall Ive got now. Oh, Scarlett, I know my darling is dead!

Somehow, she was in Scarletts arms, her small breasts heaving with sobs, and somehow theywere lying on the bed, holding each other close, and Scarlett was crying too, crying with her facepressed close against Melanies, the tears of one wetting the cheeks of the other. It hurt so terriblyto cry, but not so much as not being able to cry. Ashley is deaddead, she thought, and I havekilled him by loving him! Fresh sobs broke from her, and Melanie somehow feeling comfort in hertears tightened her arms about her neck.

At least, she whispered, at leastIve got his baby.

And I, thought Scarlett, too stricken now for anything so petty as jealousy, Ive got nothingnothingnothing except the look on his face when he told me good-by.

The first reports were Missingbelieved killed and so they appeared on the casualty list.

Melanie telegraphed Colonel Sloan a dozen times and finally a letter arrived, full of sympathy,explaining that Ashley and a squad had ridden out on a scouting expedition and had not returned.

There had been reports of a slight skirmish within the Yankee lines and Mose, frantic with grief,had risked his own life to search for Ashleys body but had found nothing. Melanie, strangely calmnow, telegraphed him money and instructions to come home.

When Missingbelieved captured appeared on the casualty lists, joy and hope reanimated thesad household. Melanie could hardly be dragged away from the telegraph office and she met everytrain hoping for letters. She was sick now, her pregnancy making itself felt in many unpleasantways, but she refused to obey Dr. Meades commands and stay in bed. A feverish energy possessedher and would not let her be still; and at night, long after Scarlett had gone to bed, she could hearher walking the floor in the next room.

One afternoon, she came home from town, driven by the frightened Uncle Peter and supportedby Rhett Butler. She had fainted at the telegraph office and Rhett, passing by and observing theexcitement, had escorted her home. He carried her up the stairs to her bedroom and while thealarmed household fled hither and you for hot bricks, blankets and whisky, he propped her on thepillows of her bed.

Mrs. Wilkes, he questioned abruptly, you are going to have a baby, are you not?

Had Melanie not been so faint, so sick, so heartsore, she would have collapsed at his question.

Even with women friends she was embarrassed by any mention of her condition, while visits to Dr.

Meade were agonizing experiences. And for a man, especially Rhett Butler, to ask such a questionwas unthinkable. But lying weak and forlorn in the bed, she could only nod. After she had nodded,it did not seem so dreadful, for he looked so kind and so concerned.

Then you must take better care of yourself. All this running about and worry wont help youand may harm the baby. If you will permit me, Mrs. Wilkes, I will use what influence I have inWashington to learn about Mr. Wilkes fate. If he is a prisoner, he will be on the Federal lists, and ifhe isntwell, theres nothing worse than uncertainty. But I must have your promise. Take care ofyourself or, before God, I wont turn a hand.

Oh, you are so kind, cried Melanie. How can people say such dreadful things about you?

Then overcome with the knowledge of her tactlessness and also with horror at having discussedher condition with a man, she began to cry weakly. And Scarlett, flying up the stairs with a hotbrick wrapped in flannel, found Rhett patting her hand.

He was as good as his word. They never knew what wires he pulled. They feared to ask,knowing it might involve an admission of his too close affiliations with the Yankees. It was amonth before he had news, news that raised them to the heights when they first heard it, but latercreated a gnawing anxiety In their hearts.

Ashley was not dead! He had been wounded and taken prisoner, and the records showed that hewas at Rock Island, a prison camp in Illinois. In their first joy, they could think of nothing exceptthat he was alive. But, when calmness began to return, they looked at one another and said RockIsland! in the same voice they would have said In Hell! For even as Andersonville was a namethat stank in the North, so was Rock Island one to bring terror to the heart of any Southerner whohad relatives imprisoned there.

When Lincoln refused to exchange prisoners, believing it would hasten the end of the war toburden the Confederacy with the feeding and guarding of Union prisoners, there were thousands ofbluecoats at Andersonville, Georgia. The Confederates on scant rations and practically withoutdrugsorbandagesfortheirownsickandwounded.(were) They had little to share with theprisoners. They fed their prisoners on what the soldiers in the field were eating, fat pork and driedpeas, and on this diet the Yankees died like flies, sometimes a hundred a day. Inflamed by thereports, the North resorted to harsher treatment of Confederate prisoners and at no place were conditionsworse than at Rock Island. Food was scanty, one blanket for three men, and the ravages ofsmallpox, pneumonia and typhoid gave the place the name of a pesthouse. Three-fourths of all themen sent there never came out alive.

And Ashley was in that horrible place! Ashley was alive but he was wounded and at RockIsland, and the snow must have been deep in Illinois when he was taken there. Had he died of hiswound, since Rhett had learned his news? Had he fallen victim to smallpox? Was he delirious withpneumonia and no blanket to cover him?

Oh, Captain Butler, isnt there some way Cant you use your influence and have himexchanged? cried Melanie.

Mr. Lincoln, the merciful and just, who cries large tears over Mrs. Bixbys five boys, hasntany tears to shed about the thousands of Yankees dying at Andersonville, said Rhett, his mouthtwisting. He doesnt care if they all die. The order is out. No exchanges. II hadnt told youbefore, Mrs. Wilkes, but your husband had a chance to get out and refused it.

Oh, no! cried Melanie in disbelief.

Yes, indeed. The Yankees are recruiting men for frontier service to fight the Indians, recruitingthem from among Confederate prisoners. Any prisoner who will take the oath of allegiance andenlist for Indian service for two years will be released and sent West. Mr. Wilkes refused.

Oh, how could he? cried Scarlett Why didnt he take the oath and then desert and come homeas soon as he got out of jail?

Melanie turned on her like a small fury.

How can you even suggest that he would do such a thing? Betray his own Confederacy bytaking that vile oath and then betray his word to the Yankees! I would rather know he was dead atRock Island than hear he had taken that oath. Id be proud of him if he died in prison. But if he didthat, I would never look on his face again. Never! Of course, he refused.

When Scarlett was seeing Rhett to the door, she asked indignantly: If it were you, wouldnt youenlist with the Yankees to keep from dying in that place and then desert?

Of course, said Rhett, his teeth showing beneath his mustache.

Then why didnt Ashley do it?

Hes a gentleman, said Rhett, and Scarlett wondered how it was possible to convey suchcynicism and contempt in that one honorable word.

Chapter 17

MAY OF 1864 CAMEa hot dry May that wilted the flowers in the budsand the Yankeesunder General Sherman were in Georgia again, above Dalton, one hundred miles northwest ofAtlanta. Rumor had it that there would be heavy fighting up there near the boundary betweenGeorgia and Tennessee. The Yankees were massing for an attack on the Western and AtlanticRailroad, the line which connected Atlanta with Tennessee and the West, the same line over whichthe Southern troops had been rushed last fall to win the victory at Chickamauga.

But, for the most part, Atlanta was not disturbed by the prospect of fighting near Dalton. Theplace where the Yankees were concentrating was only a few miles southeast of the battle field ofChickamauga. They had been driven back once when they had tried to break through the mountainpasses of that region, and they would be driven back again.

Atlantaand all of Georgiaknew that the state was far too important to the Confederacy forGeneral Joe Johnston to let the Yankees remain inside the states borders for long. Old Joe and hisarmy would not let one Yankee get south of Dalton, for too much depended on the undisturbedfunctioningof(even) Georgia. The unravaged state was a vast granary, machine shop and storehouse for the Confederacy. It manufactured much of the powder and arms used by the armyand most of the cotton and woolen goods. Lying between Atlanta and Dalton was the city of Romewith its cannon foundry and its other industries, and Etowah and Allatoona with the largest ironworkssouth of Richmond. And, in Atlanta, were not only the factories for making pistols andsaddles, tents and ammunition, but also the most extensive rolling mills in the South, the shops ofthe principal railroads and the enormous hospitals. And in Atlanta was the junction of the fourrailroads on which the very life of the Confederacy depended.

So no one worried particularly. After all, Dalton was a long way off, up near the Tennessee line.

There had been fighting in Tennessee for three years and people were accustomed to the thought ofthat state as a far-away battle field, almost as far away as Virginia or the Mississippi River.

Moreover, Old Joe and his men were between the Yankees and Atlanta, and everyone knew that,next to General Lee himself, there was no greater general than Johnston, now that StonewallJackson was dead.

Dr. Meade summed up the civilian point of view on the matter, one warm May evening on theveranda of Aunt Pittys house, when he said that Atlanta had nothing to fear, for General Johnstonwas standing in the mountains like an iron rampart. His audience heard him with varying emotions,for all who sat there rocking quietly in the fading twilight, watching the first fireflies of the seasonmoving magically through the dusk, had weighty matters on their minds. Mrs. Meade, her handupon Phils arm, was hoping the doctor was right. If the war came closer, she knew that Phil wouldhave to go. He was sixteen now and in the Home Guard. Fanny Elsing, pale and hollow eyed sinceGettysburg, was trying to keep her mind from the torturing picture which had worn a groove in hertired mind these past several monthsLieutenant Dallas McLure dying in a jolting ox cart in therain on the long, terrible retreat into Maryland.

Captain Carey Ashburns useless arm was hurting him again and moreover he was depressed bythe thought that his courtship of Scarlett was at a standstill. That had been the situation ever sincethe news of Ashley Wilkes capture, though the connection between the two events did not occur tohim. Scarlett and Melanie both were thinking of Ashley, as they always did when urgent tasks orthe necessity of carrying on a conversation did not divert them. Scarlett was thinking bitterly,sorrowfully: He must be dead or else we would have heard. Melanie, stemming the tide of fearagain and again, through endless hours, was telling herself: He cant be dead. Id know itIdfeel it if he were dead. Rhett Butler lounged in the shadows, his long legs in their elegant bootscrossed negligently, his dark face an unreadable blank. In his arms Wade slept contentedly, acleanly picked wishbone in his small hand. Scarlett always permitted Wade to sit up late whenRhett called because the shy child was fond of him, and Rhett oddly enough seemed to be fond ofWade. Generally Scarlett was annoyed by the childs presence, but he always behaved nicely inRhetts arms. As for Aunt Pitty, she was nervously trying to stifle a belch, for the rooster they hadhad for supper was a tough old bird.

That morning Aunt Pitty had reached the regretful decision that she had better kill the patriarchbefore he died of old age and pining for his harem which had long since been eaten. For days hehad drooped about the empty chicken run, too dispirited to crow. After Uncle Peter had wrung hisneck, Aunt Pitty had been beset by conscience at the thought of enjoying him, en famille, when somany of her friends had not tasted chicken for weeks, so she suggested company for dinner.

Melanie, who was now in her fifth month, had not been out in public or received guests for weeks,and she was appalled at the idea. But Aunt Pitty, for once, was firm. It would be selfish to eat therooster alone, and if Melanie would only move her top hoop a little higher no one would noticeanything and she was so flat in the bust anyway.

Oh, but Auntie I dont want to see people when Ashley

It isnt as if Ashley werehad passed away, said Aunt Pitty, her voice quavering, for in herheart she was certain Ashley was dead. Hes just as much alive as you are and it will do you goodto have company. And Im going to ask Fanny Elsing, too. Mrs. Elsing begged me to try to dosomething to arouse her and make her see people

Oh, but Auntie, its cruel to force her when poor Dallas has only been dead

Now, Melly, I shall cry with vexation if you argue with me. I guess Im your auntie and I knowwhats what. And I want a party.

So Aunt Pitty had her party, and, at the last minute, a guest she did not expect, or desire, arrived.

Just when the smell of roast rooster was filling the house, Rhett Butler, back from one of hismysterious trips, knocked at the door, with a large box of bonbons packed in paper lace under hisarm and a mouthful of two-edged compliments for her. There was nothing to do but invite him tostay, although Aunt Pitty knew how the doctor and Mrs. Meade felt about him and how bitterFanny was against any man not in uniform. Neither the Meades nor the Elsings would have spokento him on the street, but in a friends home they would, of course, have to be polite to him. Besides,he was now more firmly than ever under the protection of the fragile Melanie. After he hadintervened for her to get the news about Ashley, she had announced publicly that her home wasopen to him as long as he lived and no matter what other people might say about him.

Aunt Pittys apprehensions quieted when she saw that Rhett was on his best behavior. Hedevoted himself to Fanny with such sympathetic deference she even smiled at him, and the mealwent well. It was a princely feast Carey Ashburn had brought a little tea, which he had found in thetobacco pouch of a captured Yankee en route to Andersonville, and everyone had a cup, faintlyflavored with tobacco. There was a nibble of the tough old bird for each, an adequate amount ofdressing made of corn meal and seasoned with onions, a bowl of dried peas, and plenty of rice andgravy, the latter somewhat watery, for there was no flour with which to thicken it For dessert, therewas a sweet potato pie followed by Rhetts bonbons, and when Rhett produced real Havana cigarsfor the gentlemen to enjoy over their glass of blackberry wine, everyone agreed it was indeed aLucullan banquetWhen the gentlemen joined the ladies on the front porch, the talk turned to war. Talk alwaysturned to war now, all conversations on any topic led from war or back to warsometimes sad,often gay, but always war. War romances, war weddings, deaths in hospitals and on the field,incidents of camp and battle and march, gallantry, cowardice, humor, sadness, deprivation andhope. Always, always hope. Hope firm, unshaken despite the defeats of the summer before.

When Captain Ashburn announced he had applied for and been granted transfer from Atlanta tothe army at Dalton, the ladies kissed his stiffened arm with their eyes and covered their emotionsof pride by declaring he couldnt go, for then who would beau them about?

Young Carey looked confused and pleased at hearing such statements from settled matrons andspinsters like Mrs. Meade and Melanie and Aunt Pitty and Fanny, and tried to hope that Scarlettreally meant it.

Why, hell be back in no time, said the doctor, throwing an arm over Careys shoulder.

Therell be just one brief skirmish and the Yankees will skedaddle back into Tennessee. And whenthey get there, General Forrest will take care of them. You ladies need have no alarm about theproximity of the Yankees, for General Johnston and his army stands there in the mountains like aniron rampart. Yes, an iron rampart, he repeated, relishing his phrase. Sherman will never pass.

Hell never dislodge Old Joe.

The ladies smiled approvingly, for his lightest utterance was regarded as incontrovertible truth.

After all, men understood these matters much better than women, and if he said General Johnstonwas an iron rampart, he must be one. Only Rhett spoke. He had been silent since supper and hadsat in the twilight listening to the war talk with a down-twisted mouth, holding the sleeping childagainst his shoulder.

I believe that rumor has it that Sherman has over one hundred thousand men, now that hisreinforcements have come up?

The doctor answered him shortly. He had been under considerable strain ever since he firstarrived and found that one of his fellow diners was this man whom he disliked so heartily. Only therespect due Miss Pittypat and his presence under her roof as a guest had restrained him fromshowing his feelings more obviously.

Well, sir? the doctor barked in reply.

I believe Captain Ashburn said just a while ago that General Johnston had only about fortythousand, counting the deserters who were encouraged to come back to the colors by the lastvictory.

Sir, said Mrs. Meade indignantly. There are no deserters in the Confederate army.

I beg your pardon, said Rhett with mock humility. I meant those thousands on furlough whoforgot to rejoin their regiments and those who have been over their wounds for six months but whoremain at home, going about their usual business or doing the spring plowing.

His eyes gleamed and Mrs. Meade bit her lip in a huff. Scarlett wanted to giggle at herdiscomfiture, for Rhett had caught her fairly. There were hundreds of men skulking in the swampsand the mountains, defying the provost guard to drag them back to the army. They were the oneswho declared it was a rich mans war and a poor mans fight and they had had enough of it. Butoutnumbering these by far were men who, though carried on company rolls as deserters, had nointention of deserting permanently. They were the ones who had waited three years in vain forfurloughs and while they waited received ill-spelled letters from home: We air hungry. Therewont be no crop this yearthere aint nobody to plow. We air hungry. The commissary tookthe shoats, and we aint had no money from you in months. We air livin on dried peas.

Always the rising chorus swelled: We are hungry, your wife, your babies, your parents. Whenwill it be over? When will you come home? We are hungry, hungry. When furloughs from therapidly thinning army were denied, these soldiers went home without them, to plow their land and plant their crops, repair their houses and build up their fences. When regimental officers,understanding the situation, saw a hard fight ahead, they wrote these men, telling them to rejointheir companies and no questions would be asked. Usually the men returned when they saw thathunger at home would be held at bay for a few months longer. Plow furloughs were not lookedupon in the same light as desertion in the face of the enemy, but they weakened the army just thesame.

Dr. Meade hastily bridged over the uncomfortable pause, his voice cold: Captain Butler, thenumerical difference between our troops and those of the Yankees has never mattered. OneConfederate is worth a dozen Yankees.

The ladies nodded. Everyone knew that.

That was true at the first of the war, said Rhett. Perhaps its still true, provided theConfederate soldier has bullets for his gun and shoes on his feet and food in his stomach. Eh,Captain Ashburn?

His voice was still soft and filled with specious humility. Carey Ashburn looked unhappy, for itwas obvious that he, too, disliked Rhett intensely. He gladly would have sided with the doctor buthe could not lie. The reason he had applied for transfer to the front, despite his useless arm, wasthat he realized, as the civilian population did not, the seriousness of the situation. There weremany other men, stumping on wooden pegs, blind in one eye, fingers blown away, one arm gone,who were quietly transferring from, the commissariat, hospital duties, mail and railroad serviceback to their old fighting units. They knew Old Joe needed every man.

He did not speak and Dr. Meade thundered, losing his temper: Our men have fought withoutshoes before and without food and won victories. And they will fight again and win! I tell youGeneral Johnston cannot be dislodged! The mountain fastnesses have always been the refuge andthe strong forts of invaded peoples from ancient times. Think ofthink of Thermopylae!

Scarlett thought hard but Thermopylae meant nothing to her.

They died to the last man at Thermopylae, didnt they, Doctor? Rhett asked, and his lipstwitched with suppressed laughter.

Are you being insulting, young man?

Doctor! I beg of you! You misunderstood me! I merely asked for information. My memory ofancient history is poor.

If need be, our army will die to the last man before they permit the Yankees to advance fartherinto Georgia, snapped the doctor. But it will not be. They will drive them out of Georgia in oneskirmish.

Aunt Pittypat rose hastily and asked Scarlett to favor them with a piano selection and a song.

She saw that the conversation was rapidly getting into deep and stormy water. She had known verywell there would be trouble if she invited Rhett to supper. There was always trouble when he waspresent. Just how he started it, she never exactly understood. Dear! Dear! What did Scarlett see inthe man? And how could dear Melly defend him?

As Scarlett went obediently into the parlor, a silence fell on the porch, a silence that pulsed with resentment toward Rhett How could anyone not believe with heart and soul in the invincibility ofGeneral Johnston and his men? Believing was a sacred duty. And those who were so traitorous asnot to believe should, at least, have the decency to keep their mouths shut.

Scarlett struck a few chords and her voice floated out to them from the parlor, sweetly, sadly, inthe words of a popular song:

Into a ward of whitewashed wallsWhere the dead and dying layWounded with bayonets, shells and ballsSomebodys darling was borne one day.

Somebodys darling! so young and so brave!

Wearing still on his pale, sweet faceSoon to be hid by the dust of the graveThe lingering light of his boyhoods grace.

Matted and damp are the curls of gold, mourned Scarletts faulty soprano, and Fanny half roseand said in a faint, strangled voice: Sing something else!

The piano was suddenly silent as Scarlett was overtaken with surprise and embarrassment. Thenshe hastily blundered into the opening bars of Jacket of Gray and stopped with a discord as sheremembered how heartrending that selection was too. The piano was silent again for she wasutterly at a loss. All the songs had to do with death and parting and sorrow.

Rhett rose swiftly, deposited Wade in Fannys lap, and went into the parlor.

Play My Old Kentucky Home,  he suggested smoothly, and Scarlett gratefully plunged intoit. Her voice was joined by Rhetts excellent bass, and as they went into the second verse those onthe porch breathed more easily, though Heaven knew it was none too cheery a song, either.

Just a few more days for to tote the weary load!

No matter, twill never be light!

Just a few more days, till we totter in the road!

Then, my old Kentucky home, good night!

.

Dr. Meades prediction was rightas far as it went Johnston did stand like an iron rampart inthe mountains above Dalton, one hundred miles away. So firmly did he stand and so bitterly did he contest Shermans desire to pass down the valley toward Atlanta that finally the Yankees drewback and took counsel with themselves. They could not break the gray lines by direct assault andso, under cover of night they marched through the mountain passes in a semicircle, hoping to comeupon Johnstons rear and cut the railroad behind him at Resaca, fifteen miles below Dalton.

With those precious twin lines of iron in danger, the Confederates left their desperately defendedrifle pits and, under the starlight, made a forced march to Resaca by the short, direct road. Whenthe Yankees, swarming out of the hills, came upon them, the Southern troops were waiting forthem, entrenched behind breastworks, batteries planted, bayonets gleaming, even as they had beenat Dalton.

When the wounded from Dalton brought in garbled accounts of Old Joes retreat to Resaca,Atlanta was surprised and a little disturbed. It was as though a small, dark cloud had appeared inthe northwest, the first cloud of a summer storm. What was the General thinking about, letting theYankees penetrate eighteen miles farther into Georgia? The mountains were natural fortresses,even as Dr. Meade had said. Why hadnt Old Joe held the Yankees there?

Johnston fought desperately at Resaca and repulsed the Yankees again, but Sherman, employingthe same flanking movement, swung his vast army in another semicircle, crossed the OostanaulaRiver and again struck at the railroad in the Confederate rear. Again the gray lines were summonedswiftly from their red ditches to defend the railroad, and, weary for sleep, exhausted frommarching and fighting, and hungry, always hungry, they made another rapid march down thevalley. They reached the little town of Calhoun, six miles below Resaca, ahead of the Yankees,entrenched and were again ready for the attack when the Yankees came up. The attack came, therewas fierce skirmishing and the Yankees were beaten back. Wearily the Confederates lay on theirarms and prayed for respite and rest. But there was no rest. Sherman inexorably advanced, step bystep, swinging his army about them in a wide curve, forcing another retreat to defend the railroadat their back.

The Confederates marched in their sleep, too tired to think for the most part But when they didthink, they trusted Old Joe. They knew they were retreating but they knew they had not beenbeaten. They just didnt have enough men to hold their entrenchments and defeat Shermansflanking movements, too. They could and did lick the Yankees every time the Yankees would standand fight What would be the end of this retreat, they did not know. But Old Joe knew what he wasdoing and that was enough for them. He had conducted the retreat in masterly fashion, for they hadlost few men and the Yankees killed and captured ran high. They hadnt lost a single wagon andonly four guns. And they hadnt lost the railroad at their back, either. Sherman hadnt laid a fingeron it for all his frontal attacks, cavalry dashes and flank movements.

The railroad. It was still theirs, that slender iron line winding through the sunny valley towardAtlanta. Men lay down to sleep where they could see the rails gleaming faintly in the starlight.

Men lay down to die, and the last sight that met their puzzled eyes was the rails shining in themerciless sun, heat shimmering along them.

As they fell back down the valley, an army of refugees fell back before them. Planters andCrackers, rich and poor, black and white, women and children, the old, the dying, the crippled, thewounded, the women far gone in pregnancy, crowded the road to Atlanta on trains, afoot, on horseback, in carriages and wagons piled high with trunks and household goods. Five miles aheadof the retreating army went the refugees, halting at Resaca, at Calhoun, at Kingston, hoping at eachstop to hear that the Yankees had been driven back so they could return to their homes. But therewas no retracing that sunny road. The gray troops passed by empty mansions, deserted farms,lonely cabins with doors ajar. Here and there some lone woman remained with a few frightenedslaves, and they came to the road to cheer the soldiers, to bring buckets of well water for the thirstymen, to bind up the wounds and bury the dead in their own family burying grounds. But for themost part the sunny valley was abandoned and desolate and the untended crops stood in parchingfields.

Flanked again at Calhoun, Johnston fell back to Adairsville, where there was sharp skirmishing,then to Cassville, then south of Cartersville. And the enemy had now advanced fifty-five milesfrom Dalton. At New Hope Church, fifteen miles farther along the hotly fought way, the gray ranksdug in for a determined stand. On came the blue lines, relentlessly, like a monster serpent coiling,striking venomously, drawing its injured lengths back, but always striking again. There wasdesperate fighting at New Hope Church, eleven days of continuous fighting, with every Yankeeassault bloodily repulsed. Then Johnston, flanked again, withdrew his thinning lines a few milesfarther.

The Confederate dead and wounded at New Hope Church ran high. The wounded floodedAtlanta in train-loads and the town was appalled. Never, even after the battle of Chickamauga, hadthe town seen so many wounded. The hospitals overflowed and wounded lay on the floors ofempty stores and upon cotton bales in the warehouses. Every hotel, boarding house and privateresidence was crowded with sufferers. Aunt Pitty had her share, although she protested that it wasmost unbecoming to have strange men in the house when Melanie was in a delicate condition andwhen gruesome sights might bring on premature birth. But Melanie reefed up her top hoop a littlehigher to hide her thickening figure and the wounded invaded the brick house. There was endlesscooking and lifting and turning and fanning, endless hours of washing and rerolling bandages andpicking lint, and endless warm nights made sleepless by the babbling delirium of men in the nextroom. Finally the choked town could take care of no more and the overflow of wounded was senton to the hospitals at Macon and Augusta.

With this backwash of wounded bearing conflicting reports and the increase of frightenedrefugees crowding into the already crowded town, Atlanta was in an uproar. The small cloud on thehorizon had blown up swiftly into a large, sullen storm cloud and it was as though a faint, chillingwind blew from it.

No one had lost faith in the invincibility of the troops but everyone, the civilians at least, hadlost faith in the General. New Hope Church was only thirty-five miles from Atlanta! The Generalhad let the Yankees push him back sixty-five miles in three weeks! Why didnt he hold the Yankeesinstead of everlastingly retreating? He was a fool and worse than a fool. Graybeards in the HomeGuard and members of the state militia, safe in Atlanta, insisted they could have managed thecampaign better and drew maps on tablecloths to prove their contentions. As his lines grew thinnerand he was forced back farther, the General called desperately on Governor Brown for these verymen, but the state troops felt reasonably safe. After all, the Governor had defied Jeff Davis

demand for them. Why should he accede to General Johnston?

Fight and fall back! Fight and fall back! For seventy miles and twenty-five days theConfederates had fought almost daily. New Hope Church was behind the gray troops now, amemory in a mad haze of like memories, heat, dust, hunger, weariness, tramp-tramp on the redrutted roads, slop-slop through the red mud, retreat, entrench, fightretreat, entrench, fight. NewHope Church was a nightmare of another life and so was Big Shanty, where they turned and foughtthe Yankees like demons. But, fight the Yankees till the fields were blue with dead, there werealways more Yankees, fresh Yankees; there was always that sinister southeast curving of the bluelines toward the Confederate rear, toward the railroadand toward Atlanta!

From Big Shanty, the weary sleepless lines retreated down the road to Kennesaw Mountain, nearthe little town of Marietta, and here they spread their lines in a ten-mile curve. On the steep sidesof the mountain they dug their rifle pits and on the towering heights they planted their batteries.

Swearing, sweating men hauled the heavy guns up the precipitous slopes, for mules could notclimb the hillsides. Couriers and wounded coming into Atlanta gave reassuring reports to thefrightened townspeople. The heights of Kennesaw were impregnable. So were Pine Mountain andLost Mountain near by which were also fortified. The Yankees couldnt dislodge Old Joes menand they could hardly flank them now for the batteries on the mountain tops commanded all theroads for miles. Atlanta breathed more easily, butBut Kennesaw Mountain was only twenty-two miles away!

On the day when the first wounded from Kennesaw Mountain were coming in, Mrs.

Merriwethers carriage was at Aunt Pittys house at the unheard-of hour of seven in the morning,and black Uncle Levi sent up word that Scarlett must dress immediately and come to the hospital.

Fanny Rising and the Bonnell girls, roused early from slumber, were yawning on the back seat andthe Risings mammy sat grumpily on the box, a basket of freshly laundered bandages on her lap.

Off Scarlett went, unwillingly for she had danced till dawn the night before at the Home Guardsparty and her feet were tired. She silently cursed the efficient and indefatigable Mrs. Merriwether,the wounded and the whole Southern Confederacy, as Prissy buttoned her in her oldest andraggedest calico frock which she used for hospital work. Gulping down the bitter brew of parchedcorn and dried sweet potatoes that passed for coffee, she went out to join the girls.

She was sick of all this nursing. This very day she would tell Mrs. Merriwether that Ellen hadwritten her to come home for a visit. Much good this did her, for that worthy matron, her sleevesrolled up, her stout figure swathed in a large apron, gave her one sharp look and said: Dont letme hear any more such foolishness, Scarlett Hamilton. Ill write your mother today and tell herhow much we need you, and Im sure shell understand and let you stay. Now, put on your apronand trot over to Dr. Meade. He needs someone to help with the dressings.

Oh, God, thought Scarlett drearily, thats just the trouble. Mother will make me stay here andI shall die if I have to smell these stinks any longer! I wish I was an old lady so I could bully theyoung ones, instead of getting bulliedand tell old cats like Mrs. Merriwether to go to Halifax!

Yes, she was sick of the hospital, the foul smells, the lice, the aching, unwashed bodies. If therehad ever been any novelty and romance about nursing, that had worn off a year ago. Besides, thesemen wounded in the retreat were not so attractive as the earlier ones had been. They didnt showthe slightest interest in her and they had very little to say beyond: Hows the fightin goin?

Whats Old Joe doin now? Mighty clever fellow. Old Joe. She didnt think Old Joe a mightyclever fellow. All he had done was let the Yankees penetrate eighty-eight miles into Georgia. No,they were not an attractive lot. Moreover, many of them were dying, dying swiftly, silently, havinglittle strength left to combat the blood poisoning, gangrene, typhoid and pneumonia which had setin before they could reach Atlanta and a doctor.

The day was hot and the flies came in the open windows in swarms, fat lazy flies that broke thespirits of the men as pain could not. The tide of smells and pain rose and rose about her.

Perspiration soaked through her freshly starched dress as she followed Dr. Meade about, a basin inher hand.

Oh, the nausea of standing by the doctor, trying not to vomit when his bright knife cut intomortifying flesh! And oh, the horror of hearing the screams from the operating ward whereamputations were going on! And the sick, helpless sense of pity at the sight of tense, white faces ofmangled men waiting for the doctor to get to them, men whose ears were filled with screams, menwaiting for the dreadful words: Im sorry, my boy, but that hand will have to come off. Yes, yes, Iknow; but look, see those red streaks? Itll have to come off.

Chloroform was so scarce now it was used only for the worst amputations and opium was aprecious thing, used only to ease the dying out of life, not the living out of pain. There was noquinine and no iodine at all. Yes, Scarlett was sick of it all, and that morning she wished that she,like Melanie, had the excuse of pregnancy to offer. That was about the only excuse that wassocially acceptable for not nursing these days.

When noon came, she put off her apron and sneaked away from the hospital while Mrs.

Merriwether was busy writing a letter for a gangling, illiterate mountaineer. Scarlett felt that shecould stand it no longer. It was an imposition on her and she knew that when the wounded came inon the noon train there would be enough work to keep her busy until night-falland probablywithout anything to eatShe went hastily up the two short blocks to Peachtree Street breathing the unfouled air in asdeep gulps as her tightly laced corset would permit. She was standing on the corner, uncertain as towhat she would do next, ashamed to go home to Aunt Pittys but determined not to go back to thehospital, when Rhett Butler drove by.

You look like the ragpickers child, he observed, his eyes taking in the mended lavendercalico, streaked with perspiration and splotched here and there with water which had slopped fromthe basin. Scarlett was furious with embarrassment and indignation. Why did he always noticewomens clothing and why was he so rude as to remark upon her present untidiness?

I dont want to hear a word out of you. You get out and help me in and drive me somewherewhere nobody will see me. I wont go back to the hospital if they hang me! My goodness, I didntstart this war and I dont see any reason why I should be worked to death and

A traitor to Our Glorious Cause!

The pots calling the kettle black. You help me in. I dont care where you were going. Youregoing to take me riding now.

He swung himself out of the carriage to the ground and she suddenly thought how nice it was to see a man who was whole, who was not minus eyes or limbs, or white with pain or yellow withmalaria, and who looked well fed and healthy. He was so well dressed too. His coat and trouserswere actually of the same material and they fitted him, instead of hanging in folds or being almosttoo tight for movement. And they were new, not ragged, with dirty bare flesh and hairy legsshowing through. He looked as if he had not a care in the world and that in itself was startlingthese days, when other men wore such worried, preoccupied, grim looks. His brown face wasBland and his mouth, red lipped, clear cut as a womans, frankly sensual, smiled carelessly as helifted her into the carriage.

The muscles of his big body rippled against his well-tailored clothes, as he got in beside her,and, as always, the sense of his great physical power struck her like a blow. She watched the swellof his powerful shoulders against the cloth with fascination that disturbing, a little frightening.Hisbodyseemedso toughandhard, astoug(a) hand hardashiskeen(was) mind. His was suchan easy, graceful strength, lazy as a panther stretching in the sun, alert as a panther to spring andstrike.

You little fraud, he said, clucking to the horse. You dance all night with the soldiers and givethem roses and ribbons and tell them how youd die for the Cause, and when it comes to bandaginga few wounds and picking off a few lice, you decamp hastily.

Cant you talk about something else and drive faster? It would be just my luck for GrandpaMerriwether to come out of his store and see me and tell old ladyI mean, Mrs. Merriwether.

He touched up the mare with the whip and she trotted briskly across Five Points and across therailroad tracks that cut the town in two. The train bearing the wounded had already come in and thelitter bearers were working swiftly in the hot sun, transferring wounded into ambulances andcovered ordnance wagons. Scarlett had no qualm of conscience as she watched them but only afeeling of vast relief that she had made her escape.

Im just sick and tired of that old hospital, she said, settling her billowing skirts and tying herbonnet bow more firmly under her chin. And every day more and more wounded come in. Its allGeneral Johnstons fault. If hed just stood up to the Yankees at Dalton, theyd have

But he did stand up to the Yankees, you ignorant child. And if hed kept on standing there,Sherman would have flanked him and crushed him between the two wings of his army. And hedhave lost the railroad and the railroad is what Johnston is fighting for.

Oh, well, said Scarlett, on whom military strategy was utterly lost. Its his fault anyway. Heought to have done something about it and I think he ought to be removed. Why doesnt he standand fight instead of retreating?

You are like everyone else, screaming Off with his head because he cant do the impossible.

He was Jesus the Savior at Dalton, and now hes Judas the Betrayer at Kennesaw Mountain, all insix weeks. Yet, just let him drive the Yankees back twenty miles and hell be Jesus again. My child,Sherman has twice as many men as Johnston, and he can afford to lose two men for every one ofour gallant laddies. And Johnston cant afford to lose a single man. He needs reinforcements badlyand what is he getting? Joe Browns Pets. What a help theyll be!

Is the militia really going to be called out? The Home Guard, too? I hadnt heard. How do you know?

Theres a rumor floating about to that effect The rumor arrived on the train from Milledgevillethis morning. Both the militia and the Home Guards are going to be sent in to reinforce GeneralJohnston. Yes, Governor Browns darlings are likely to smell powder at last, and I imagine most ofthem will be much surprised. Certainly they never expected to see action. The Governor as good aspromised them they wouldnt. Well, thats a good joke on them. They thought they had bombproofs because the Governor stood up to even Jeff Davis and refused to send them to Virginia. Saidthey were needed for the defense of their state. Whod have ever thought the war would come totheir own back yard and theyd really have to defend their state?

Oh, how can you laugh, you cruel thing! Think of the old gentlemen and the little boys in theHome Guard! Why, little Phil Meade will have to go and Grandpa Merriwether and Uncle HenryHamilton.

Im not talking about the little boys and the Mexican War veterans. Im talking about braveyoung men like Willie Guinan who like to wear pretty uniforms and wave swords

And yourself!

My dear, that didnt hurt a bit! I wear no uniform and wave no sword and the fortunes of theConfederacy mean nothing at all to me. Moreover, I wouldnt be caught dead in the Home Guardor in any army, for that matter. I had enough of things military at West Point to do me the rest ofmy life. ... Well, I wish Old Joe luck. General Lee cant send him any help because the Yankees arekeeping him busy in Virginia. So the Georgia state troops are the only reinforcements Johnston canget. He deserves better, for hes a great strategist He always manages to get places before theYankees do. But hell have to keep falling back if he wants to protect the railroad; and mark mywords, when they push him out of the mountains and onto the flatter land around here, hes goingto be butchered.

Around here? cried Scarlett. You know mighty well the Yankees will never get this far!

Kennesaw is only twenty-two miles away and Ill wager you

Rhett, look, down the street! That crowd of men! They arent soldiers. What on earth... ? Why,theyre darkies!

There was a great cloud of red dust coming up the street and from the cloud came the sound ofthe tramping of many feet and a hundred or more negro voices, deep throated, careless, singing ahymn. Rhett pulled the carriage over to the curb, and Scarlett looked curiously at the sweatingblack men, picks and shovels over their shoulders, shepherded along by an officer and a squad ofmen wearing the insignia of the engineering corps.

What on earth  ? she began again.

Then her eyes lighted on a singing black buck in the front rank. He stood nearly six and a halffeet tall, a giant of a man, ebony black, stepping along with the lithe grace of a powerful animal,his white teeth flashing as he led the gang in Go Down, Moses. Surely there wasnt a negro onearth as tall and loud voiced as this one except Big Sam, the foreman of Tara. But what was BigSam doing here, so far away from home, especially now that there was no overseer on the plantation and he was Geralds right-hand man?

As she half rose from her seat to look closer, the giant caught sight of her and his black face splitin a grin of delighted recognition. He halted, dropped his shovel and started toward her, calling tothe negroes nearest him: Gawdlmighty! Its Miss Scarlett! You, Lige! Postle! Prophet! DarsMiss Scarlett!

There was confusion in the ranks. The crowd halted uncertainly, grinning, and Big Sam,followed by three other large negroes, ran across the road to the carriage, closely followed by theharried, shouting officer.

Get back in line, you fellows! Get back, I tell you or Ill-Why its Mrs. Hamilton. Goodmorning, Mam, and you, too, sir. What are you up to inciting mutiny and insubordination? Godknows, Ive had trouble enough with these boys this morning.

Oh, Captain Randall, dont scold them! They are our people. This is Big Sam our foreman, andElijah and Apostle and Prophet from Tara. Of course, they had to speak to me. How are you,boys?

She shook hands all around, her small white hand disappearing into their huge black paws andthe four capered with delight at the meeting and with pride at displaying before their comradeswhat a pretty Young Miss they had.

What are you boys doing so far from Tara? Youve run away, Ill be bound. Dont you knowthe patterollers will get you sure?

They bellowed pleasedly at the badinage.

Runned away? answered Big Sam. Nom, us ain runned away. Dey done sont an tuck us,kase us wuz de fo bigges an stronges hans at Tara. His white teeth showed proudly. Deyspecially sont fer me, kase Ah could sing so good. Yasm, Mist Frank Kennedy, he come by an

tuck us.

But why, Big Sam?

Lawd, Miss Scarlett! Ain you heerd? Us is ter dig de ditches fer de wite gempmums ter hide inwen de Yankees comes.

Captain Randall and the occupants of the carriage smothered smiles at this naive explanation ofrifle pits.

Cose, Mis Gerald might nigh had a fit wen dey tuck me, an he say he kain run de placewidout me. But Miss Ellen she say; Tek him, Mist Kennedy. De Confedrutsy need Big Sam mo

dan us do. An she gib me a dollar an tell me ter do jes whut de wite gempmums tell me. Sohyah us is.

What does it all mean, Captain Randall?

Oh, its quite simple. We have to strengthen the fortifications of Atlanta with more miles ofrifle pits, and the General cant spare any men from the front to do it. So weve been impressingthe strongest bucks in the countryside for the work.

But

A cold little fear was beginning to throb in Scarletts breast. More miles of rifle pits! Whyshould they need more? Within the last year, a series of huge earth redoubts with batteryemplacements had been built all around Atlanta, one mile from the center of town. These greatearthworks were connected with rifle pits and they ran, mile after mile, completely encircling thecity. More rifle pits!

Butwhy should we be fortified any more than we are already fortified? We wont need whatweve got. Surely, the General wont let

Our present fortifications are only a mile from town, said Captain Randall shortly. And thatstoo close for comfortor safety. These new ones are going to be farther away. You see, anotherretreat may bring our men into Atlanta.

Immediately he regretted his last remark, as her eyes widened with fear.

But, of course there wont be another retreat, he added hastily. The lines around KennesawMountain are impregnable. The batteries are planted all up the mountain sides and they commandthe roads, and the Yankees cant possibly get by.

But Scarlett saw him drop his eyes before the lazy, penetrating look Rhett gave him, and she wasfrightened. She remembered Rhetts remark: When the Yankees push him out of the mountainsand onto the flatter land, hell be butchered.

Oh, Captain, do you think

Why, of not! Dont fret your mind one minute. Old Joe just believes in taking precautions.Thats(course) the only reason were digging more entrenchments. ... But I must be goingnow. Its been pleasant, talking to you. ... Say good-by to your mistress, boys, and lets get going.

Good-by, boys. Now, if you get sick or hurt or in trouble, let me know. I live right downPeachtree Street, down there in almost the last house at the end of town. Wait a minute Shefumbled in her reticule. Oh, dear, I havent a cent. Rhett, give me a few shinplasters. Here, BigSam, buy some tobacco for yourself and the boys. And be good and do what Captain Randall tellsyou.

The straggling line re-formed, the dust arose again in a red cloud as they moved off and BigSam started up the singing again.

Go do-ow, Mos-es! Waaa-ay, do-own, in Eeejup laa-an!

An te-el O-le Faa-ro-oTer let mahpeee-pul go!

Rhett, Captain Randall was lying to me, just like all the men dotrying to keep the truth fromus women for fear well faint. Or was he lying? Oh, Rhett, if theres no danger, why are theydigging these new breastworks? Is the army so short of men theyve got to use darkies?

Rhett clucked to the mare.

The army is damned short of men. Why else would the Home Guard be called out? And as forthe entrenchments, well, fortifications are supposed to be of some value in case of a siege. TheGeneral is preparing to make his final stand here.

A siege! Oh, turn the horse around. Im going home, back home to Tara, right away.

What ails you?

A siege! Name of God, a siege! Ive heard about sieges! Pa was in one or maybe it was his Pa,and Pa told me

What siege?

The siege at Drogheda when Cromwell had the Irish, and they didnt have anything to eat andPa said they starved and died in the streets and finally they ate all the cats and rats and even thingslike cockroaches. And he said they ate each other too, before they surrendered, though I never didknow whether to believe that or not. And when Cromwell took the town all the women were Asiege! Mother of God!

You are the most barbarously ignorant young person I ever saw. Drogheda was in sixteenhundred and something and Mr. OHara couldnt possibly have been alive then. Besides, Shermanisnt Cromwell.

No, but hes worse! They say

And as for the exotic viands the Irish ate at the siegepersonally Id as soon eat a nice juicyrat as some of the victuals theyve been serving me recently at the hotel. I think I shall have to goback to Richmond. They have good food there, if you have the money to pay for it. His eyesmocked the fear in her face.

Annoyed that she had shown her trepidation, she cried: I dont see why youve stayed here thislong! All you think about is being comfortable and eating andand things like that.

I know no more pleasant way to pass the time than in eating and erthings like that, he said.

And as for why I stay herewell, Ive read a good deal about sieges, beleaguered cities and thelike, but Ive never seen one. So I think Ill stay here and watch. I wont get hurt because Im anoncombatant and besides I want the experience. Never pass up new experiences, Scarlett. Theyenrich the mind.

My minds rich enough.

Perhaps you know best about that, but I should say But that would be ungallant. Andperhaps, Im staying here to rescue you when the siege does come. Ive never rescued a maiden indistress. That would be a new experience, too.

She knew he was teasing her but she sensed a seriousness behind his words. She tossed herhead.

I wont need you to rescue me. I can take care of myself, thank you.

Dont say that, Scarlett! Think of it, if you like, but never, never say it to a man. Thats thetrouble with Yankee girls. Theyd be most charming if they werent always telling you that theycan take care of themselves, thank you. Generally they are telling the truth, God help them. And so men let them take care of themselves.

How you do run on, she said coldly, for there was no insult worse than being likened to aYankee girl. I believe youre lying about a siege. You know the Yankees will never get toAtlanta.

Ill bet you they will be here within the month. Ill bet you a box of bonbons against Hisdark eyes wandered to her lips. Against a kiss.

For a last brief moment, fear of a Yankee invasion clutched her heart but at the word kiss, sheforgot about it. This was familiar ground and far more interesting than military operations. Withdifficulty she restrained a smile of glee. Since the day when he gave her the green bonnet, Rhetthad made no advances which could in any way be construed as those of a lover. He could never beinveigled into personal conversations, try though she might, but now with no angling on her part,he was talking about kissing.

I dont care for such personal conversation, she said coolly and managed a frown. Besides,Id just as soon kiss a pig.

Theres no accounting for tastes and Ive always heard the Irish were partial to pigskept themunder their beds, in fact. But, Scarlett, you need kissing badly. Thats whats wrong with you. Allyour beaux have respected you too much, though God knows why, or they have been too afraid ofyou to really do right by you. The result is that you are unendurably uppity. You should be kissedand by someone who knows how.

The conversation was not going the way she wanted it. It never did when she was with him.

Always, it was a duel in which she was worsted.

And I suppose you think you are the proper person? she asked with sarcasm, holding hertemper in check with difficulty.

Oh, yes, if I cared to take the trouble, he said carelessly. They say I kiss very well.

Oh, she began, indignant at the slight to her charms. Why, you  But her eyes fell insudden confusion. He was smiling, but in the dark depths of his eyes a tiny light flickered for abrief moment, like a small raw flame.

Of course, youve probably wondered why I never tried to follow up that chaste peck I gaveyou, the day I brought you that bonnet

I have never

Then you arent a nice girl, Scarlett, and Im sorry to hear it. All really nice girls wonder whenmen dont try to kiss them. They know they shouldnt want them to and they know they must actinsulted if they do, but just the same, they wish the men would try.  Well, my dear, take heartSome day, I will kiss you and you will like it. But not now, so I beg you not to be too impatient.

She knew he was teasing but, as always, his teasing maddened her. There was always too muchtruth in the things he said. Well, this finished him. If ever, ever he should be so ill bred as to try totake any liberties with her, she would show him.

Will you kindly turn the horse around, Captain Butler? I wish to go back to the hospital.

Do you indeed, my ministering angel? Then lice and slops are preferable to my conversation?

Well, far be it from me to keep a pair of willing hands from laboring for Our Glorious Cause. Heturned the horses head and they started back toward Five Points.

As to why I have made no further advances, he pursued blandly, as though she had notsignified that the conversation was at an end, Im waiting for you to grow up a little more. Yousee, it wouldnt be much fun for me to kiss you now and Im quite selfish about my pleasures. Inever fancied kissing children.

He smothered a grin, as from the corner of his eye he saw her bosom heave with silent wrath.

And then, too, he continued softly, I was waiting for the memory of the estimable AshleyWilkes to fade.

At the mention of Ashleys name, sudden pain went through her, sudden hot tears stung her lids.

Fade? The memory of Ashley would never fade, not if he were dead a thousand years. She thoughtof Ashley wounded, dying in a far-off Yankee prison, with no blankets over him, with no one wholoved him to hold his hand, and she was filled with hate for the well-fed man who sat beside her,jeers just beneath the surface of his drawling voice.

She was too angry to speak and they rode along in silence for some while.

I understand practically everything about you and Ashley, now, Rhett resumed. I began withyour inelegant scene at Twelve Oaks and, since then, Ive picked up many things by keeping myeyes open. What things? Oh, that you still cherish a romantic schoolgirl passion for him which hereciprocates as well as his honorable nature will permit him. And that Mrs. Wilkes knows nothingand that, between the two of you, youve done her a pretty trick. I understand practicallyeverything, except one thing that piques my curiosity. Did the honorable Ashley ever jeopardizehis immortal soul by kissing you?

A stony silence and an averted head were his answers.

Ah, well, so he did kiss you. I suppose it was when he was here on furlough. And now that hesprobably dead you are cherishing it to your heart. But Im sure youll get over it and when youveforgotten his kiss, Ill

She turned in fury.

You go toHalifax, she said tensely, her green eyes slits of rage. And let me out of thiscarriage before I jump over the wheels. And I dont ever want to speak to you again.

He stopped the carriage, but before he could alight and assist her she sprang down. Her hoopcaught on the wheel and for a moment the crowd at Five Points had a flashing view of petticoatsand pantalets. Then Rhett leaned over and swiftly released it She flounced off without a word,without even a backward look, and he laughed softly and clicked to the horse.

Chapter 18

FOR THE FIRST TIME since the war began, Atlanta could hear the sound of battle. In the earlymorning hours before the noises of the town awoke, the cannon at Kennesaw Mountain could be heard faintly, far away, low dim booming that might have passed for summer thunder. Occasionallyitwaslouden(a) ough to be heard even above the rattle of traffic at noon. People triednot to listen to it, tried to talk, to laugh, to carry on their business, just as though the Yankees werenot there, twenty-two miles away, but always ears were strained for the sound. The town wore apreoccupied look, for no matter what occupied their hands, all were listening, listening, their heartsleaping suddenly a hundred times a day. Was the booming louder? Or did they only think it waslouder? Would General Johnston hold them this time? Would he?

Panic lay just beneath the surface. Nerves which had been stretched tighter and tighter each dayof the retreat began to reach the breaking point. No one spoke of fears. That subject was taboo, butstrained nerves found expression in loud criticism of the General. Public feeling was at fever heat.

Sherman was at the very doors of Atlanta. Another retreat might bring the Confederates into thetown.

Give us a general who wont retreat! Give us a man who will stand and fight!

With the far-off rumbling of cannon in their ears, the state militia, Joe Browns Pets, and theHome Guard marched out of Atlanta, to defend the bridges and ferries of the Chattahoochee Riverat Johnstons back. It was a gray, overcast day and, as they marched through Five Points and outthe Marietta road, a fine rain began to fall. The whole town had turned out to see them off and theystood, close packed, under the wooden awnings of the stores on Peachtree Street and tried to cheer.

Scarlett and Maybelle Merriwether Picard had been given permission to leave the hospital andwatch the men go out, because Uncle Henry Hamilton and Grandpa Merriwether were in the HomeGuard, and they stood with Mrs. Meade, pressed in the crowd, tiptoeing to get a better view.

Scarlett, though filled with the universal Southern desire to believe only the pleasantest and mostreassuring things about the progress of the fighting, felt cold as she watched the motley ranks goby. Surely, things must be in a desperate pass if this rabble of bombproofers, old men and littleboys were being called out! To be sure there were young and able-bodied men in the passing lines,tricked out in the bright uniforms of socially select militia units, plumes waving, sashes dancing.

But there were so many old men and young boys, and the sight of them made her heart contractwith pity and with fear. There were graybeards older than her father trying to step jauntily along inthe needle-fine rain to the rhythm of the fife and dram corps. Grandpa Merriwether, with Mrs.

Merriwethers best plaid shawl laid across his shoulders to keep out the rain, was in the first rankand he saluted the girls with a grin. They waved their handkerchiefs and cried gay good-bys tohim; but Maybelle, gripping Scarletts arm, whispered: Oh, the poor old darling! A real good rainstormwill just about finish him! His lumbago

Uncle Henry Hamilton marched in the rank behind Grandpa Merriwether, the collar of his longblack coat turned up about his ears, two Mexican War pistols in his belt and a small carpetbag inhis hand. Beside him marched his black valet who was nearly as old as Uncle Henry, with an openumbrella held over them both. Shoulder to shoulder with their elders came the young boys, none ofthem looking over sixteen. Many of them had run away from school to join the army, and here andthere were clumps of them in the cadet uniforms of military academies, the black cock feathers ontheir tight gray caps wet with rain, the clean white canvas straps crossing their chests sodden. PhilMeade was among them, proudly wearing his dead brothers saber and horse pistols, his hatbravely pinned up on one side. Mrs. Meade managed to smile and wave until he had passed and then she leaned her head on the back of Scarletts shoulder for a moment as though her strengthhad suddenly left her.

Many of the men were totally unarmed, for the Confederacy had neither rifles nor ammunitionto issue to them. These men hoped to equip themselves from killed and captured Yankees. Manycarried bowie knives in their boots and bore in their hands long thick poles with iron-pointed tipsknown as Joe Brown pikes. The lucky ones had old flintlock muskets slung over their shouldersand powder-horns at their belts.

Johnston had lost around ten thousand men in his retreat. He needed ten thousand more freshtroops. And this, thought Scarlett frightened, is what he is getting!

As the artillery rumbled by, splashing mud into the watching crowds, a negro on a mule, ridingclose to a cannon caught her eye. He was a young, saddle-colored negro with a serious face, andwhen Scarlett saw him she cried: Its Mose! Ashleys Mose! Whatever is he doing here? Shefought her way through the crowd to the curb and called: Mose! Stop!

The boy seeing her, drew rein, smiled delightedly and started to dismount. A soaking sergeant,riding behind him, called: Stay on that mule, boy, or Ill light a fire under you! We got to git to themountain some time.

Uncertainly, Mose looked from the sergeant to Scarlett and she, splashing through the mud,close to the passing wheels, caught at Moses stirrup strap.

Oh, just a minute, Sergeant! Dont get down, Mose. What on earth are you doing here?

Ahs off ter de war, agin, Miss Scarlett. Dis time wid Ole Mist John stead ob Mist Ashley.

Mr. Wilkes! Scarlett was stunned; Mr. Wilkes was nearly seventy. Where is he?

Back wid de las cannon, Miss Scarlett. Back dar!

Sorry, lady. Move on, boy!

Scarlett stood for a moment, ankle deep in mud as the guns lurched by. Oh, no! She thought. Itcant be. Hes too old. And he doesnt like war any more than Ashley did! She retreated back a fewpaces toward the curb and scanned each face that passed. Then, as the last cannon and limber chestcame groaning and splashing up, she saw him, slender, erect, his long silver hair wet upon hisneck, riding easily upon a little strawberry mare that picked her way as daintily through the mudholes as a lady in a satin dress. Whythat mare was Nellie! Mrs. Tarletons Nellie! BeatriceTarletons treasured darling!

When he saw her standing in the mud, Mr. Wilkes drew rein with a smile of pleasure and,dismounting, came toward her.

I had hoped to see you, Scarlett. I was charged with so many messages from your people. Butthere was no time. We just got in this morning and they are rushing us out immediately, as yousee.

Oh, Mr. Wilkes, she cried desperately, holding his hand. Dont go! Why must you go?

Ah, so you think Im too old! he smiled, and it was Ashleys smile in an older face. Perhaps Iam too old to march but not to ride and shoot. And Mrs. Tarleton so kindly lent me Nellie, so I am well mounted. I hope nothing happens to Nellie, for if something should happen to her, I couldnever go home and face Mrs. Tarleton. Nellie was the last horse she had left. He was laughingnow, turning away her fears. Your mother and father and the girls are well and they sent you theirlove. Your father nearly came up with us today!

Oh, not Pa! cried Scarlett in terror. Not Pa! He isnt going to the war, is he?

No, but he was. Of course, he cant walk far with his stiff knee, but he was all for riding awaywith us. Your mother agreed, providing he was able to jump the pasture fence, for, she said, therewould be a lot of rough riding to be done in the army. Your father thought that easy, butwouldyou believe it? When his horse came to the fence, he stopped dead and over his head went yourfather! Its a wonder it didnt break his neck! You know how obstinate he is. He got right up andtried it again. Well, Scarlett, he came off three times before Mrs. OHara and Pork assisted him tobed. He was in a taking about it, swearing that your mother had spoken a wee word in the beastsear. He just isnt up to active service, Scarlett. You need have no shame about it. After all,someone must stay home and raise crops for the army.

Scarlett had no shame at all, only an active feeling of relief.

Ive sent India and Honey to Macon to stay with the Burrs and Mr. OHara is looking afterTwelve Oaks as well as Tara.  I must go, my dear. Let me kiss your pretty face.

Scarlett turned up her lips and there was a choking pain in her throat. She was so fond of Mr.

Wilkes. Once, long ago, she had hoped to be his daughter-in-law.

And you must deliver this kiss to Pittypat and this to Melanie, he said, kissing her lightly twomore times. And how is Melanie?

She is well.

Ah! His eyes looked at her but through her, past her as Ashleys had done, remote gray eyeslooking on another world. I should have liked to see my first grandchild. Good-by, my dear.

He swung onto Nellie and cantered off, his hat in his hand, his silver hair bare to the rain.

Scarlett had rejoined Maybelle and Mrs. Meade before the import of his last words broke upon her.

Then in superstitious terror she crossed herself and tried to say a prayer. He had spoken of death,just as Ashley had done, and now Ashley No one should ever speak of death! It was temptingProvidence to mention death. As the three women started silently back to the hospital in the rain,Scarlett was praying: Not him, too, God. Not him and Ashley, too!

The retreat from Dalton to Kennesaw Mountain had taken from early May to mid-June and asthe hot rainy days of June passed and Sherman failed to dislodge the Confederates from the steepslippery slopes, hope again raised its head. Everyone grew more cheerful and spoke more kindly ofGeneral Johnston. As wet June days passed into a wetter July and the Confederates, fightingdesperately around the entrenched heights, still held Sherman at bay, a wild gaiety took hold ofAtlanta. Hope went to their heads like champagne. Hurrah! Hurrah! Were holding them! Anepidemic of parties and dances broke out. Whenever groups of men from the fighting were in townfor the night, dinners were given for them and afterwards there was dancing and the girls,outnumbering the men ten to one, made much of them and fought to dance with them.

Atlanta was crowded with visitors, refugees, families of wounded men in the hospitals, wivesand mothers of soldiers fighting at the mountain who wished to be near them in case of wounds. Inaddition, bevies of belles from the country districts, where all remaining men were under sixteen orover sixty, descended upon the town. Aunt Pitty disapproved highly of these last, for she felt theyhad come to Atlanta for no reason at all except to catch husbands, and the shamelessness of it madeher wonder what the world was coming to. Scarlett disapproved, too. She did not care for the eagercompetition furnished by the sixteen-year-olds whose fresh cheeks and bright smiles made oneforget their twice-turned frocks and patched shoes. Her own clothes were prettier and newer thanmost, thanks to the material Rhett Butler had brought her on the last boat he ran in, but, after all,she was nineteen and getting along and men had a way of chasing silly young things.

A widow with a child was at a disadvantage with these pretty minxes, she thought But in theseexciting days her widowhood and her motherhood weighed less heavily upon her than ever before.

Between hospital duties in the day time and parties at night, she hardly ever saw Wade. Sometimesshe actually forgot, for long stretches, that she had a child.

In the wet summer nights, Atlantas homes stood open to the soldiers, the townsdefenders.The(warm) big houses from Washington Street to Peachtree Street blazed with lights, as themuddy fighters in from the rifle pits were entertained, and the sound of banjo and fiddle and thescrape of dancing feet and light laughter carried far on the night air. Groups hung over pianos andvoices sang lustily the sad words of Your Letter Came but Came Too Late while ragged gallantslooked meaningly at girls who laughed from behind turkey-tail fans, begging them not to wait untilit was too late. None of the girls waited, if they could help it. With the tide of hysterical gaiety andexcitement flooding the city, they rushed into matrimony. There were so many marriages thatmonth while Johnston was holding the enemy at Kennesaw Mountain, marriages with the brideturned out in blushing happiness and the hastily borrowed finery of a dozen friends and the groomwith saber banging at patched knees. So much excitement, so many parties, so many thrills!

Hurrah! Johnston is holding the Yanks twenty-two miles away!

Yes, the lines around Kennesaw Mountain were impregnable. After twenty-five days of fighting,even General Sherman was convinced of this, for his losses were enormous. Instead of continuingthe direct assault, he swung his army in a wide circle again and tried to come between theConfederates and Atlanta. Again, the strategy worked. Johnston was forced to abandon the heightshe had held so well, in order to protect his rear. He had lost a third of his men in that fight and theremainder slogged tiredly through the rain across the country toward the Chattahoochee River. TheConfederates could expect no more reinforcements, whereas the railroad, which the Yankees nowheld from Tennessee south to the battle line, brought Sherman fresh troops and supplies daily. Sothe gray lines went back through the muddy fields, back toward Atlanta.

With the loss of the supposedly unconquerable position, a fresh wave of terror swept the town.

For twenty-five wild, happy days, everyone had assured everyone else that this could not possiblyhappen. And now it had happened! But surely the General would hold the Yankees on the oppositebank of the river. Though God knows the river was close enough, only seven miles away!

But Sherman flanked them again, crossing the stream above them, and the weary gray files were forced to hurry across the yellow water and throw themselves again between the invaders andAtlanta. They dug in hastily in shallow pits to the north of the town in the valley of PeachtreeCreek. Atlanta was in agony and panic.

Fight and fall back! Fight and fall back! And every retreat was bringing the Yankees closer tothe town. Peachtree Creek was only five miles away! What was the General thinking about?

The cries of Give us a man who will stand and fight! penetrated even to Richmond. Richmondknew that if Atlanta was lost, the war was lost, and after the army had crossed the Chattahoochee,General Johnston was removed from command. General Hood, one of his corps commanders, tookthe army, and the town breathed a little easier. Hood wouldnt retreat. Not that tallKent(over) uckian, with his flowing beard and flashing eye! He had the reputation of a bulldog. Heddrive the Yankees back from the creek, yes, back across the river and on up the road every step ofthe way back to Dalton. But the army cried: Give us back Old Joe! for they had been with OldJoe all the weary miles from Dalton and they knew, as the civilians could not know, the odds thathad opposed them.

Sherman did not wait for Hood to get himself in readiness to attack. On the day after the changein command, the Yankee general struck swiftly at the little town of Decatur, six miles beyondAtlanta, captured it and cut the railroad there. This was the railroad connecting Atlanta withAugusta, with Charleston, and Wilmington and with Virginia. Sherman had dealt the Confederacya crippling blow. The time had come for action! Atlanta screamed for action!

Then, on a July afternoon of steaming heat, Atlanta had its wish. General Hood did more thanstand and fight. He assaulted the Yankees fiercely at Peachtree Creek, hurling his men from theirrifle pits against the blue lines where Shermans men outnumbered him more than two to one.

Frightened, praying that Hoods attack would drive the Yankees back, everyone listened to thesound of booming cannon and the crackling of thousands of rifles which, though five miles awayfrom the center of town, were so loud as to seem almost in the next block. They could hear therumblings of the batteries, see the smoke which rolled like low-hanging clouds above the trees, butfor hours no one knew how the battle was going.

By late afternoon the first news came, but it was uncertain, contradictory, frightening, brought asit was by men wounded in the early hours of the battle. These men began straggling in, singly andin groups, the less seriously wounded supporting those who limped and staggered. Soon a steadystream of them was established, making their painful way into town toward the hospitals, theirfaces black as negroes from powder stains, dust and sweat, their wounds unbandaged, blooddrying, flies swarming about them.

Aunt Pittys was one of the first houses which the wounded reached as they struggled in fromthe north of the town, and one after another, they tottered to the gate, sank down on the green lawnand croaked:

Water!

All that burning afternoon, Aunt Pitty and her family, black and white, stood in the sun withbuckets of water and bandages, ladling drinks, binding wounds until the bandages gave out andeven the torn sheets and towels were exhausted. Aunt Pitty completely forgot that the sight of blood always made her faint and she worked until her little feet in their too small shoes swelledand would no longer support her. Even Melanie, now great with child, forgot her modesty andworked feverishly side by side with Prissy, Cookie and Scarlett, her face as tense as any of thewounded. When at last she fainted, there was no place to lay her except on the kitchen table, asevery bed, chair and sofa in the house was filled with wounded.

Forgotten in the tumult, little Wade crouched behind the banisters on the front porch, peering outonto the lawn like a caged, frightened rabbit, his eyes wide with terror, sucking his thumb andhiccoughing. Once Scarlett saw him and cried sharply: Go play in the back yard, WadeHampton! but he was too terrified, too fascinated by the mad scene before him to obey.

The lawn was covered with prostrate men, too tired to walk farther, too weak from wounds tomove. These Uncle Peter loaded into the carriage and drove to the hospital, making trip after tripuntil the old horse was lathered. Mrs. Meade and Mrs. Merriwether sent their carriages and they,too, drove off, springs sagging beneath the weight of the wounded.

Later, in the long, hot summer twilight, the ambulances came rumbling down the road from thebattle field and commissary wagons, covered with muddy canvas. Then farm wagons, ox carts andeven private carriages commandeered by the medical corps. They passed Aunt Pittys house,jolting over the bumpy road, packed with wounded and dying men, dripping blood into the reddust. At the sight of the women with buckets and dippers, the conveyances halted and the choruswent up in cries, in whispers:

Water!

Scarlett held wobbling heads that parched lips might drink, poured buckets of water over dusty,feverish bodies and into open wounds that the men might enjoy a brief moments relief. Shetiptoed to hand dippers to ambulance drivers and of each she questioned, her heart in her throat:

What news? What news?

From all came back the answer: Dont know fer sartin, lady. Its too soon to tell.

Night came and it was sultry. No air moved and the flaring pine knots the negroes held made theair hotter. Dust clogged Scarletts nostrils and dried her lips. Her lavender calico dress, so freshlyclean and starched that morning, was streaked with blood, dirt and sweat. This, then, was whatAshley had meant when he wrote that war was not glory but dirt and misery.

Fatigue gave an unreal, nightmarish cast to the whole scene. It couldnt be realor it was real,then the world had gone mad. If not, why should she be standing here in Aunt Pittys peaceful frontyard, amid wavering lights, pouring water over dying beaux? For so many of them were her beauxand they tried to smile when they saw her. There were so many men jolting down this dark, dustyroad whom she knew so well, so many men dying here before her eyes, mosquitoes and gnatsswarming their bloody faces, men with whom she had danced and laughed, for whom she hadplayed music and sung songs, teased, comforted and loveda little.

She found Carey Ashburn on the bottom layer of wounded in an ox cart; barely alive from abullet wound in his head. But she could not extricate him without disturbing six other woundedmen, so she let him go on to the hospital. Later she heard he had died before a doctor ever saw himand was buried somewhere, no one knew exactly. So many men had been buried that month, in shallow, hastily dug graves at Oakland Cemetery. Melanie felt it keenly that they had not been ableto get a lock of Careys hair to send to his mother in Alabama.

As the hot night wore on and their backs were aching and their knees buckling from weariness,Scarlett and Pitty cried to man after man: What news? What news?

And as the long hours dragged past, they had their answer, an answer that made them lookwhitely into each others eyes.

Were falling back. Weve got to fall back. They outnumber us by thousands. TheYankees have got Wheelers cavalry cut off near Decatur. We got to reinforce them. Our boyswill all be in town soon.

Scarlett and Pitty clutched each others arms for support.

Areare the Yankees coming?

Yesm, theyre comin all right but they aint goin ter git fer, lady. Dont fret, Miss, theycant take Atlanta. No, Mam, we got a million miles of breastworks round this town. I heardOld Joe say it myself: I can hold Atlanta forever.  But we aint got Old Joe. We got Shutup, you fool! Do you want to scare the ladies? The Yankees will never take this place, Mam.

Whynt you ladies go ter Macon or somewheres thats safer? Aint you got no kinfolks there?

The Yankees aint goin ter take Atlanta but still it aint goin ter be so healthy for ladies whilsttheyre tryin it. Theres goin ter be a powerful lot of shellin.

In a warm steaming rain the next day, the defeated army poured through Atlanta by thousands,exhausted by hunger and weariness, depleted by seventy-six days of bat-tie and retreat, their horsesstarved scarecrows, their cannon and caissons harnessed with odds and ends of rope and strips ofrawhide. But they did not come in as disorderly rabble, in full rout. They marched in good order,jaunty for all their rags, their torn red battle flags flying in the rain. They had learned retreatingunder Old Joe, who had made it as great a feat of strategy as advancing. The bearded, shabby filesswung down Peachtree Street to the tune of Maryland! My Maryland! and all the town turnedout to cheer them. In victory or defeat, they were their boys.

The state militia who had gone out so short a time before, resplendent in new uniforms, couldhardly be distinguished from the seasoned troops, so dirty and unkempt were they. There was anew look in their eyes. Three years of apologizing, of explaining why they were not at the frontwas behind them now. They had traded security behind the lines for the hardships of battle. Manyof their number had traded easy living for hard death. They were veterans now, veterans of briefservice, but veterans just the same, and they had acquitted themselves well. They searched out thefaces of friends in the crowd and stared at them proudly, defiantly. They could hold up their headsnow.

The old men and boys of the Home Guard marched by, the graybeards almost too weary to lifttheir feet, the boys wearing the faces of tired children, confronted too early with adult problems.

Scarlett caught sight of Phil Meade and hardly recognized him, so black was his face with powderand grime, so taut with strain and weariness. Uncle Henry went limping by, hatless in the rain, hishead stuck through a hole in a piece of old oilcloth. Grandpa Merriwether rode in on a guncarriage, his bare feet tied in quilt scraps. But search though she might, she saw no sign of John Wilkes.

Johnstons veterans, however, went by with the tireless, careless step which had carried them forthree years, and they still had the energy to grin and wave at pretty girls and to call rude gibes tomen not in uniform. They were on their way to the entrenchments that ringed the townnoshallow, hastily dug trenches, these, but earthworks, breast high, reinforced with sandbags andtipped with sharpened staves of wood. For mile after mile the trenches encircled the town, redgashes surmounted by red mounds, waiting for the men who would fill them.

The crowd cheered the troops as they would have cheered them in victory. There was fear inevery heart but, now that they knew the truth, now that the worst had happened, now that the warwas in their front yard, a change came over the town. There was no panic now, no hysteria.

Whatever lay in hearts did not show on faces. Everyone looked cheerful even if the cheer wasstrained. Everyone tried to show brave, confident faces to the troops. Everyone repeated what OldJoe had said, just before he was relieved of command: I can hold Atlanta forever.

Now that Hood had had to retreat, quite a number wished, with the soldiers, that they had OldJoe back, but they forbore saying it and took courage from Old Joes remark:

I can hold Atlanta forever!

Not for Hood the cautious tactics of General Johnston. He assaulted the Yankees on the east, heassaulted them on the west. Sherman was circling the town like a wrestler seeking a fresh hold onan opponents body, and Hood did not remain behind his rifle pits waiting for the Yankees toattack. He went out boldly to meet them and savagely fell upon them. Within the space of a fewdays the battles of Atlanta and of Ezra Church were fought, and both of them were majorengagements which made Peachtree Creek seem like a skirmish.

But the Yankees kept coming back for more. They had suffered heavy losses but they couldafford to lose. And all the while their batteries poured shells into Atlanta, killing people in theirhomes, ripping roofs off buildings, tearing huge craters in the streets. The townsfolk sheltered asbest they could in cellars, in holes in the ground and in shallow tunnels dug in railroad cuts.

Atlanta was under siege.

Within eleven days after he had taken command, General Hood had lost almost as many men asJohnston had lost in seventy-four days of battle and retreat, and Atlanta was hemmed in on threesides.

The railroad from Atlanta to Tennessee was now in Shermans hands for its full length. His armywas across the railroad to the east and he had cut the railroad running southwest to Alabama. Onlythe one railroad to the south, to Macon and Savannah, was still open. The town was crowded withsoldiers, swamped with wounded, jammed with refugees, and this one line was inadequate for thecrying needs of the stricken city. But as long as this railroad could be held, Atlanta could stillstand.

Scarlett was terrified when she realized how important this line had become, how fiercelySherman would fight to take it, how desperately Hood would fight to defend it. For this was therailroad which ran through the County, through Jonesboro. And Tara was only five miles from Jonesboro! Tara seemed like a haven of refuge by comparison with the screaming hell of Atlanta,but Tara was only five miles from Jonesboro!

Scarlett and many other ladies sat on the flat roofs of stores, shaded by their tiny parasols, andwatched the fighting on the day of the battle of Atlanta. But when shells began falling in the streetsfor the first time, they fled to the cellars, and that night the exodus of women, children and oldpeople from the city began. Macon was their destination and many of those who took the train thatnight had already refugeed five and six times before, as Johnston fell back from Dalton. They weretraveling lighter now than when they arrived in Atlanta. Most of them carried only a carpetbag anda scanty lunch done up in a bandana handkerchief. Here and there, frightened servants carriedsilver pitchers, knives and forks and a family portrait or two which had been salvaged in the firstfight.

Mrs. Merriwether and Mrs. Elsing refused to leave. They were needed at the hospital andfurthermore, they said proudly, they werent afraid and no Yankees were going to run them out oftheir homes. But Maybelle and her baby and Fanny Elsing went to Macon. Mrs. Meade wasdisobedient for the first time in her married life and flatly refused to yield to the doctors commandthat she take the train to safety. The doctor needed her, she said. Moreover, Phil was somewhere inthe trenches and she wanted to be near by in case ...

But Mrs. Whiting went and many other ladies of Scarletts circle. Aunt Pitty, who had been thefirst to denounce Old Joe for his policy of retreat, was among the first to pack her trunks. Hernerves, she said, were delicate and she could not endure noises. She feared she might faint at anexplosion and not be able to reach the cellar. No, she was not afraid. Her baby mouth tried to set inmartial lines but failed. Shed go to Macon and stay with her cousin, old Mrs. Burr, and the girlsshould come with her.

Scarlett did not want to go to Macon. Frightened as she was of the shells, shed rather stay inAtlanta than go to Macon, for she hated old Mrs. Burr cordially. Years ago, Mrs. Burr had said shewas fast after catching her kissing her son Willie at one of the Wilkes house parties. No, she toldAunt Pitty, Ill go home to Tara and Melly can go to Macon with you.

At this Melanie began to cry in a frightened, heartbroken way. When Aunt Pitty fled to get Dr.

Meade, Melanie caught Scarletts hand in hers, pleading:

Dear, dont go to Tara and leave me! Ill be so lonely without you. Oh, Scarlett, Id just die ifyou werent with me when the baby came! Yes Yes, I know Ive got Aunt Pitty and she is sweetBut after all, shes never had a baby, and sometimes she makes me so nervous I could scream.

Dont desert me, darling. Youve been just like a sister to me, and besides, she smiled wanly, youpromised Ashley youd take care of me. He told me he was going to ask you.

Scarlett stared down at her in wonderment. With her own dislike of this woman so strong shecould barely conceal it, how could Melly love her so? How could Melly be so stupid as not toguess the secret of her love of Ashley? She had given herself away a hundred times during thesemonths of torment, waiting for news of him. But Melanie saw nothing, Melanie who could seenothing but good in anyone she loved. ... Yes, she had promised Ashley she would look out for Melanie. Oh, Ashley! Ashley! you must be dead, dead these many months! And now your promisereaches out and clutches me!

Well, she said shortly, I did promise him that and I dont go back on my promises. But Iwont go to Macon and stay with that old Burr cat. Id claw her eyes out in five minutes. Im goinghome to Tara and you can come with me. Mother would love to have you.

Oh, Id like that! Your mother is so sweet. But you know Auntie would just die if she wasntwith me when the baby came, and I know she wont go to Tara. Its too close to the fighting, andAuntie wants to be safe.

Dr. Meade, who had arrived out of breath, expecting to find Melanie in premature labor at least,judging by Aunt Pittys alarmed summoning, was indignant and said as much. And upon learningthe cause of the upset, he settled the matter with words that left no room for argument.

Its out of the question for you to go to Macon, Miss Melly. I wont answer for you if youmove. The trains are crowded and uncertain and the passengers are liable to be put off in thewoods at any time, if the trains are needed for the wounded or troops and supplies. In your condition

But if I went to Tara with Scarlett

I tell you I wont have you moved. The train to Tara is the train to Macon and the sameconditions prevail. Moreover, no one knows just where the Yankees are now, but they are all overeverywhere. Your train might even be captured. And even if you reached Jonesboro safely, theredbe a five-mile ride over a rough road before you ever reached Tara. Its no trip for a woman in adelicate condition. Besides, theres not a doctor in the County since old Dr. Fontaine joined thearmy.

But there are midwives

I said a doctor, he answered brusquely and his eyes unconsciously went over her tiny frame. Iwont have you moved. It might be dangerous. You dont want to have the baby on the train or in abuggy, do you?

This medical frankness reduced the ladies to embarrassed blushes and silence.

Youve got to stay right here where I can watch you, and you must stay in bed. No running upand down stairs to cellars. No, not even if shells come right in the window. After all, theres not somuch danger here. Well have the Yankees beaten back in no time. ... Now, Miss Pitty, you go righton to Macon and leave the young ladies here.

Unchaperoned? she cried, aghast.

They are matrons, said the doctor testily. And Mrs. Meade is just two houses away. Theywont be receiving any male company anyway with Miss Melly in her condition. Good Heavens,Miss Pitty! This is war time. We cant think of the proprieties now. We must think of Miss Melly.

He stamped out of the room and waited on the front porch until Scarlett joined him.

I shall talk frankly to you, Miss Scarlett, he began, jerking at his gray beard. You seem to bea young woman of common sense, so spare me your blushes. I do not want to hear any further talk about Miss Melly being moved. I doubt if she could stand the trip. She is going to have a difficulttime, even in the best of circumstancesvery narrow in the hips, as you know, and probably willneed forceps for her delivery, so I dont want any ignorant darky midwife meddling with her.

Women like her should never have children, but Anyway, you pack Miss Pittys trunk and sendher to Macon. Shes so scared shell upset Miss Melly and that wont do any good. And now,Miss, he fixed her with a piercing glance, I dont want to hear about you going home, either. Youstay with Miss Melly till the baby comes. Not afraid, are you?

Oh, no! lied Scarlett, stoutly.

Thats a brave girl. Mrs. Meade will give you whatever chaperonage you need and Ill sendover old Betsy to cook for you, if Miss Pitty wants to take her servants with her. It wont be forlong. The baby ought to be here in another five weeks, but you never can tell with first babies andall this shelling going on. It may come any day.

So Aunt Pittypat went to Macon, in floods of tears, taking Uncle Peter and Cookie with her. Thecarriage and horse she donated to the hospital in a burst of patriotism which she immediatelyregretted and that brought on more tears. And Scarlett and Melanie were left alone with Wade andPrissy in a house that was much quieter, even though the cannonading continued.

Chapter 19

IN THOSE FIRST DAYS of the siege, when the Yankees crashed here and there against thedefenses of the city, Scarlett was so frightened by the bursting shells she could only cowerhelplessly, her hands over her ears, expecting every moment to be blown into eternity. When sheheard the whistling screams that heralded their approach, she rushed to Melanies room and flungherself on the bed beside her, and the two clutched each other, screaming Oh! Oh! as they buriedtheir heads in the pillows. Prissy and Wade scurried for the cellar and crouched in the cob-webbeddarkness, Prissy squalling at the top of her voice and Wade sobbing and hiccoughing.

Suffocating under feather pillows while death screamed overhead, Scarlett silently cursedMelanie for keeping her from the safer regions below stairs. But the doctor had forbidden Melanieto walk and Scarlett had to stay with her. Added to her terror of being blown to pieces was herequally active terror that Melanies baby might arrive at any moment. Sweat broke out on Scarlettwith clammy dampness, whenever this thought entered her mind. What would she do if the babystarted coming? She knew shed rather let Melanie die than go out on the streets to hunt for thedoctor when the shells were falling like April rain. And she knew Prissy could be beaten to deathbefore she would venture forth. What would she do if the baby came?

These matters she discussed with Prissy in whispers one evening, as they prepared Melaniessupper tray, and Prissy, surprisingly enough, calmed her fears.

Miss Scarlett, effen we kain git de doctah wen Miss Mellys time come, doan you bodder. Ahkin manage. Ah knows all bout birthin. Ain mah ma a midwife? Ain she raise me ter be amidwife, too? Jes you leave it ter me.

Scarlett breathed more easily knowing that experienced hands were near, but she nevertheless yearned to have the ordeal over and done with. Mad to be away from exploding shells, desperate toget home to the quiet of Tara, she prayed every night that the baby would arrive the next day, soshe would be released from her promise and could leave Atlanta. Tara seemed so safe, so far awayfrom all this misery.

Scarlett longed for home and her mother as she had never longed for anything in all her life. Ifshe were just near Ellen she wouldnt be afraid, no matter what happened. Every night after a dayof screeching ear-splitting shells, she went to bed determined to tell Melanie the next morning thatshe could not stand Atlanta another day, that she would have to go home and Melanie would haveto go to Mrs. Meades. But, as she lay on her pillow, there always rose the memory of Ashleysface as it had looked when she last saw him, drawn as with an inner pain but with a little smile onhis lips: Youll take care of Melanie, wont you? Youre so strong.  Promise me. And she hadpromised. Somewhere, Ashley lay dead. Wherever he was, he was watching her, holding her tothat promise. Living or dead, she could not fail him, no matter what the cost. So she remained dayafter day.

In response to Ellens letters, pleading with her to come home, she wrote minimizing thedangers of the siege, explaining Melanies predicament and promising to come as soon as the babywas born. Ellen, sensitive to the bonds of kin, be they blood or marriage, wrote back reluctantlyagreeing that she must stay but demanding Wade and Prissy be sent home immediately. Thissuggestion met with the complete approval of Prissy, who was now reduced to teeth-chatteringidiocy at every unexpected sound. She spent so much time crouching in the cellar that the girlswould have fared badly but for Mrs. Meades stolid old Betsy.

Scarlett was as anxious as her mother to have Wade out of Atlanta, not only for the childssafety, but because his constant fear irritated her. Wade was terrified to speechlessness by theshelling, and even when lulls came he clung to Scarletts skirts, too terrified to cry. He was afraidto go to bed at night, afraid of the dark, afraid to sleep lest the Yankees should come and get him,and the sound of his soft nervous whimpering in the night grated unendurably on her nerves.

Secretly she was just as frightened as he was, but it angered her to be reminded of it every minuteby his tense, drawn face. Yes, Tara was the place for Wade. Prissy should take him there and returnimmediately to be present when the baby came.

But before Scarlett could start the two on their homeward journey, news came that the Yankeeshad swung to the south and were skirmishing along the railroad between Atlanta and Jonesboro.

Suppose the Yankees should capture the train on which Wade and Prissy were ridingScarlett andMelanie turned pale at the thought, for everyone knew that Yankee atrocities on helpless childrenwere even more dreadful than on women. So she feared to send him home and he remained inAtlanta, a frightened, silent little ghost, pattering about desperately after his mother, fearing tohave her skirt out of his hand for even a minute.

The siege went on through the hot days of July, thundering days following nights of sullen,ominous stillness, and the town began to adjust itself. It was as though, the worst having happened,they had nothing more to fear. They had feared a siege and now they had a siege and, after all, itwasnt so bad. Life could and did go on almost as usual. They knew they were sitting on a volcano,but until that volcano erupted there was nothing they could do. So why worry now? And probablyit wouldnt erupt anyway. Just look how General Hood is holding the Yankees out of the city! And see how the cavalry is holding the railroad to Macon! Sherman will never take it!

But for all their apparent insouciance in the face of falling shells and shorter rations, for all theirignoring the Yankees, barely half a mile away, and for all their boundless confidence in the raggedline of gray men in the rifle pits, there pulsed, just below the skin of Atlanta, a wild uncertaintyover what the next day would bring. Suspense, worry, sorrow, hunger and the torment of rising,falling, rising hope was wearing that skin thin.

Gradually, Scarlett drew courage from the brave faces of her friends and from the mercifuladjustment which nature makes when what cannot be cured must be endured. To be sure, she stilljumped at the sound of explosions but she did not run screaming to burrow her head underMelanies pillow. She could now gulp and say weakly: That was close, wasnt it?

She was less frightened also because life had taken on the quality of a dream, a dream tooterrible to be real. It wasnt possible that she, Scarlett OHara, should be in such a predicament,with the danger of death about her every hour, every minute. It wasnt possible that the quiet tenorof life could have changed so completely in so short a time.

It was unreal, grotesquely unreal, that morning skies which dawned so tenderly blue could beprofaned with cannon smoke that hung over the town like low thunder clouds, that warm noontidesfilled with the piercing sweetness of massed honeysuckle and climbing roses could be so fearful,as shells screamed into the streets, bursting like the crack of doom, throwing iron splintershundreds of yards, blowing people and animals to bits.

Quiet, drowsy afternoon siestas had ceased to be, for though the clamor of battle might lull fromtime to time, Peachtree Street was alive, and noisy at all hours, cannon and ambulances rumblingby, wounded stumbling in from the rifle pits, regiments hurrying past at double-quick, orderedfrom the ditches on one side of town to the defense of some hard-pressed earthworks on the other,and couriers dashing headlong down the street toward headquarters as though the fate of theConfederacy hung on them.

The hot nights brought a measure of quiet but it was a sinister quiet. When the night was still, itwas too stillas though the tree frogs, katydids and sleepy mockingbirds were too frightened toraise their voices in the usual summer-night chorus. Now and again, the quiet was broken sharplyby the crack-cracking of musket fire in the last line of defenses.

Often in the late night hours, when the lamps were out and Melanie asleep and deathly silencepressed over the town, Scarlett, lying awake, heard the latch of the front gate click and soft urgenttappings on the front door.

Always, faceless soldiers stood on the dark porch and from the darkness many different voicesspoke to her. Sometimes a cultured voice came from the shadows: Madam, my abject apologiesfor disturbing you, but could I have water for myself and my horse? Sometimes it was the hardburring of a mountain voice, sometimes the odd nasals of the flat Wiregrass country to the farsouth, occasionally the lulling drawl of the Coast that caught at her heart, reminding her of Ellensvoice.

Missy, I got a pardner here who I wuz aimin ter git ter the horsepittle but looks like he aintgoin ter last that fer. Kin you take him in?

Lady, I shore could do with some vittles. Id shore relish a corn pone if it didnt deprive younone.

Madam, forgive my intrusion butcould I spend the night on your porch? I saw the roses andsmelled the honeysuckle and it was so much like home that I was emboldened

No, these nights were not real! They were a nightmare and the men were part of that nightmare,men without bodies or faces, only tired voices speaking to her from the warm dark. Draw water,serve food, lay pillows on the front porch, bind wounds, hold the dirty heads of the dying. No, thiscould not be happening to her!

Once, late in July, it was Uncle Henry Hamilton who came tapping in the night. Uncle Henrywas minus his umbrella and carpetbag now, and his fat stomach as well. The skin of his pink fatface hung down in loose folds like the dewlaps of a bulldog and his long white hair was indescribablydirty. He was almost barefoot, crawling with lice, and he was hungry, but his irasciblespirit was unimpaired.

Despite his remark: Its a foolish war when old fools like me are out toting guns, the girlsreceived the impression that Uncle Henry was enjoying himself. He was needed, like the youngmen, and he was doing a young mans work. Moreover, he could keep up with the young men,which was more than Grandpa Merriwether could do, he told them gleefully. Grandpas lumbagowas troubling him greatly and the Captain wanted to discharge him. But Grandpa wouldnt gohome. He said frankly that he preferred the Captains swearing and bullying to his daughter-inlawscoddling, and her incessant demands that he give up chewing tobacco and launder his beardevery day.

Uncle Henrys visit was brief, for he had only a four-hour furlough and he needed half of it forthe long walk in from the breastworks and back.

Girls, Im not going to see you all for a while, he announced as he sat in Melanies bedroom,luxuriously wriggling his blistered feet in the tub of cold water Scarlett had set before him. Ourcompany is going out in the morning.

Where? questioned Melanie frightened, clutching his arm.

Dont put your hand on me, said Uncle Henry irritably. Im crawling with lice. War would bea picnic if it wasnt for lice and dysentery. Wherem I going? Well, I havent been told but Ive gota good idea. Were marching south, toward Jonesboro, in the morning, unless Im greatly in error.

Oh, why toward Jonesboro?

Because theres going to be big fighting there, Missy. The Yankees are going to take therailroad if they possibly can. And if they do take it, its good-by Atlanta!

Oh, Uncle Henry, do you think they will?

Shucks, girls! No! How can they when Im there? Uncle Henry grinned at their frightenedfaces and then, becoming serious again: Its going to be a hard fight, girls. Weve got to win it.

You know, of course, that the Yankees have got all the railroads except the one to Macon, but thatisnt all theyve got. Maybe you girls didnt know it, but theyve got every road, too, every wagonlane and bridle path, except the McDonough road, Atlantas in a bag and the strings of the bag are at Jonesboro. And if the Yankees can take the railroad there, they can pull up the strings and haveus, just like a possum in a poke. So, we dont aim to let them get that railroad.  I may be gone awhile, girls. I just came in to tell you all good-by and to make sure Scarlett was still with you,Melly.

Of course, shes with me, said Melanie fondly. Dont you worry about us, Uncle Henry, anddo take care of yourself.

Uncle Henry wiped his wet feet on the rag rug and groaned as he drew on his tattered shoes.

I got to be going, he said. Ive got five miles to walk. Scarlett, you fix me up some kind oflunch to take. Anything youve got.

After he had kissed Melanie good-by, he went down to the kitchen where Scarlett was wrappinga corn pone and some apples in a napkin.

Uncle Henryis itis it really so serious?

Serious? Godlmighty, yes! Dont be a goose. Were in the last ditch.

Do you think theyll get to Tara?

Why began Uncle Henry, irritated at the feminine mind which thought only of personalthings when broad issues were involved. Then, seeing her frightened, woebegone face, he softened.

Of course they wont. Taras five miles from the railroad and its the railroad the Yankees want.

Youve got no more sense than a June bug, Missy. He broke off abruptly. I didnt walk all thisway here tonight just to tell you all good-by. I came to bring Melly some bad news, but when I gotup to it I just couldnt tell her. So Im going to leave it to you to do.

Ashley isntyou havent heard anythingthat hes dead?

Now, how would I be hearing about Ashley when Ive been standing in rifle pits up to the seatof my pants in mud? the old gentleman asked testily. No. Its about his father. John Wilkes isdead.

Scarlett sat down suddenly, the half-wrapped lunch in her hand.

I came to tell Mellybut I couldnt. You must do it And give her these.

He hauled from his pockets a heavy gold watch with dangling seals, a small miniature of thelong dead Mrs. Wilkes and a pair of massive cuff buttons. At the sight of the watch which she hadseen in John Wilkes hands a thousand times, the full realization came over Scarlett that Ashleysfather was really dead. And she was too stunned to cry or to speak. Uncle Henry fidgeted, coughedand did not look at her, lest he catch sight of a tear that would upset him.

He was a brave man, Scarlett. Tell Melly that. Tell her to write it to his girls. And a goodsoldier for all his years. A shell got him. Came right down on him and his horse. Tore the horsesI shot the horse myself, poor creature. A fine little mare she was. Youd better write Mrs. Tarletonabout that, too. She set a store on that mare. Wrap up my lunch, child. I must be going. There, dear,dont take it so hard. What better way can an old man die than doing a young mans work?

Oh, he shouldnt have died! He shouldnt have ever gone to the war. He should have lived and seen his grandchild grow up and died peacefully in bed. Oh, why did he go? He didnt believe insecession and he hated the war and

Plenty of us think that way, but what of it? Uncle Henry blew his nose grumpily. Do youthink I enjoy letting Yankee riflemen use me for a target at my age? But theres no other choice fora gentleman these days. Kiss me good-by, child, and dont worry about me. Ill come through thiswar safely.

Scarlett kissed him and heard him go down the steps into the dark, heard the latch click on thefront gate. She stood for a minute looking at the keepsakes in her hand. And then she went up thestairs to tell Melanie.

At the end of July came the unwelcome news, predicted by Uncle Henry, that the Yankees hadswung around again toward Jonesboro. They had cut the railroad four miles below the town, butthey had been beaten off by the Confederate cavalry; and the engineering corps, sweating in thebroiling sun, had repaired the line.

Scarlett was frantic with anxiety. For three days she waited, fear growing in her heart. Then areassuring letter came from Gerald. The enemy had not reached Tara. They had heard the sound ofthe fight but they had seen no Yankees.

Geralds letter was so full of brag and bluster as to how the Yankees had been driven from therailroad that one would have thought he personally had accomplished the feat, single handed. Hewrote for three pages about the gallantry of the troops and then, at the end of his letter, mentionedbriefly that Carreen was ill. The typhoid, Mrs. OHara said it was. She was not very ill and Scarlettwas not to worry about her, but on no condition must she come home now, even if the railroadshould become safe. Mrs. OHara was very glad now that Scarlett and Wade had not come homewhen the siege began. Mrs. OHara said Scarlett must go to church and say some Rosaries forCarreens recovery.

Scarletts conscience smote her at this last, for it had been months since she had been to church.

Once she would have thought this omission a mortal sin but, somehow, staying away from churchdid not seem so sinful now as it formerly had. But she obeyed her mother and going to her roomgabbled a hasty Rosary. When she rose from her knees she did not feel as comforted as she hadformerly felt after prayer. For some time she had felt that God was not watching out for her, theConfederates or the South, in spite of the millions of prayers ascending to Him daily.

That night she sat on the front porch with Geralds letter in her bosom where she could touch itoccasionally and bring Tara and Ellen closer to her. The lamp in the parlor window threw oddgolden shadows onto the dark vine-shrouded porch, and the matted tangle of yellow climbing rosesand honeysuckle made a wall of mingled fragrance about her. The night was utterly still. Not eventhe crack of a rifle had sounded since sunset and the world seemed far away. Scarlett rocked backand forth, lonely, miserable since reading the news from Tara, wishing that someone, anyone, evenMrs. Merriwether, were with her. But Mrs. Merriwether was on night duty at the hospital, Mrs.

Meade was at home making a feast for Phil, who was in from the front lines, and Melanie wasasleep. There was not even the hope of a chance caller. Visitors had fallen off to nothing this last week, for every man who could walk was in the rifle pits or chasing the Yankees about thecountryside near Jonesboro.

It was not often that she was alone like this and she did not like it. When she was alone she hadto think and, these days, thoughts were not so pleasant. Like everyone else, she had fallen into thehabit of thinking of the past, the dead.

Tonight when Atlanta was so quiet, she could close her eyes and imagine she was back in therural stillness of Tara and that life was unchanged, unchanging. But she knew that life in theCounty would never be the same again. She thought of the four Tarletons, the red-haired twins andTom and Boyd, and a passionate sadness caught at her throat. Why, either Stu or Brent might havebeen her husband. But now, when the war was over and she went back to Tara to live, she wouldnever again hear their wild halloos as they dashed up the avenue of cedars. And Raiford Calvert,who danced so divinely, would never again choose her to be his partner. And the Munroe boys andlittle Joe Fontaine andOh, Ashley! she sobbed, dropping her head into her hands. Ill never get used to you beinggone!

She heard the front gate click and she hastily raised her head and dashed her hand across her weteyes. She rose and saw it was Rhett Butler coming up the walk, carrying his wide Panama hat inhis hand. She had not seen him since the day when she had alighted from his carriage soprecipitously at Five Points. On that occasion, she had expressed the desire never to lay eyes onhim again. But she was so glad now to have someone to talk to, someone to divert her thoughtsfrom Ashley, that she hastily put the memory from her mind. Evidently he had forgotten thecontretemps, or pretended to have forgotten it, for he settled himself on the top step at her feetwithout mention of their late difference.

So you didnt refugee to Macon! I heard that Miss Pitty had retreated and, of course, I thoughtyou had gone too. So, when I saw your light I came here to investigate. Why did you stay?

To keep Melanie company. You see, shewell, she cant refugee just now.

Thunderation, he said, and in the lamplight she saw that he was frowning. You dont mean totell me Mrs. Wilkes is still here? I never heard of such idiocy. Its quite dangerous for her in hercondition.

Scarlett was silent, embarrassed, for Melanies condition was not a subject she could discusswith a man. She was embarrassed, too, that Rhett should know it was dangerous for Melanie. Suchknowledge sat ill upon a bachelor.

Its quite ungallant of you not to think that I might get hurt too, she said tartly.

His eyes flickered with amusement.

Id back you against the Yankees any day.

Im not sure that thats a compliment, she said uncertainly.

It isnt, he answered. When will you stop looking for compliments in mens lightestutterances?

When Im on my deathbed, she replied and smiled, thinking that there would always be mento compliment her, even if Rhett never did.

Vanity, vanity, he said. At least, you are frank about it.

He opened his cigar case, extracted a black cigar and held it to his nose for a moment. A matchflared, he leaned back against a post and, clasping his hands about his knees, smoked a while insilence. Scarlett resumed her rocking and the still darkness of the warm night closed about them.

The mockingbird, which nested in the tangle of roses and honeysuckle, roused from slumber andgave one timid, liquid note. Then, as if thinking better of the matter, it was silent again.

From the shadow of the porch, Rhett suddenly laughed, a low, soft laugh.

So you stayed with Mrs. Wilkes! This is the strangest situation I ever encountered!

I see nothing strange about it, she answered uncomfortably, immediately on the alert.

No? But then you lack the impersonal viewpoint My impression has been for some time pastthat you could hardly endure Mrs. Wilkes. You think her silly and stupid and her patriotic notionsbore you. You seldom pass by the opportunity to slip in some belittling remark about her, sonaturally it seems strange to me that you should elect to do the unselfish thing and stay here withher during this shelling. Now, just why did you do it?

Because shes Charlies sisterand like a sister to me, answered Scarlett with as much dignityas possible though her cheeks were growing hot.

You mean because shes Ashleys Wilkes widow.

Scarlett rose quickly, struggling with her anger.

I was almost on the point of forgiving you for your former boorish conduct but now I shant doit. I wouldnt have ever let you come upon this porch at all, if I hadnt been feeling so blue and

Sit down and smooth your ruffled fur, he said, and his voice changed. He reached up andtaking her hand pulled her back into her chair. Why are you blue?

Oh, I had a letter from Tara today. The Yankees are close to home and my little sister is ill withtyphoid andandso now, even if I could go home, like I want to, Mother wouldnt let me forfear Id catch it too. Oh, dear, and I do so want to go home!

Well, dont cry about it, he said, but his voice was kinder. You are much safer here in Atlantaeven if the Yankees do come than youd be at Tara. The Yankees wont hurt you and typhoidwould.

The Yankees wouldnt hurt me! How can you say such a lie?

My dear girl, the Yankees arent fiends. They havent horns and hoofs, as you seem to think.

They are pretty much like Southernersexcept with worse manners, of course, and terribleaccents.

Why, the Yankees would

Rape you? I think not. Though, of course, theyd want to.

If you are going to talk vilely I shall go into the house, she cried, grateful that the shadows hid her crimson face.

Be frank. Wasnt that what you were thinking?

Oh, certainly not!

Oh, but it was! No use getting mad at me for reading your thoughts. Thats what all ourdelicately nurtured and pure-minded Southern ladies think. They have it on their minds constantly.

Ill wager even dowagers like Mrs. Merriwether ...

Scarlett gulped in silence, remembering that wherever two or more matrons were gatheredtogether, in these trying days, they whispered of such happenings, always in Virginia or Tennesseeor Louisiana, never close to home. The Yankees raped women and ran bayonets through childrensstomachs and burned houses over the heads of old people. Everyone knew these things were trueeven if they didnt shout them on the street corners. And if Rhett had any decency he would realizethey were true. And not talk about them. And it wasnt any laughing matter either.

She could hear him chuckling softly. Sometimes he was odious. In fact, most of the time he wasodious. It was awful for a man to know what women really thought about and talked about. Itmade a girl feel positively undressed. And no man ever learned such things from good womeneither. She was indignant that he had read her mind. She liked to believe herself a thing of mysteryto men, but she knew Rhett thought her as transparent as glass.

Speaking of such matters, he continued, have you a protector or chaperon in the house? Theadmirable Mrs. Merriwether or Mrs. Meade? They always look at me as if they knew I was herefor no good purpose.

Mrs. Meade usually comes over at night, answered Scarlett, glad to change the subject Butshe couldnt tonight Phil, her boy, is home.

What luck, he said softly, to find you alone.

Something in his voice made her heart beat pleasantly faster and she felt her face flush. She hadheard that note in mens voices often enough to know that it presaged a declaration of love. Oh,what fun! If he would just say he loved her, how she would torment him and get even with him forall the sarcastic remarks he had flung at her these past three years. She would lead him a chase thatwould make up for even that awful humiliation of the day he witnessed her slapping Ashley. Andthen shed tell him sweetly she could only be a sister to him and retire with the full honors of war.

She laughed nervously in pleasant anticipation.

Dont giggle, he said, and taking her hand, he turned it over and pressed his lips into the palm.

Something vital, electric, leaped from him to her at the touch of his warm mouth, something thatcaressed her whole body thrillingly. His lips traveled to her wrist and she knew he must feel theleap of her pulse as her heart quickened and she tried to draw back her hand. She had not bargainedon thisthis treacherous warm tide of feeling that made her want to run her hands through hishair, to feel his lips upon her mouth.

She wasnt in love with him, she told herself confusedly. She was in love with Ashley. But howto explain this feeling that made her hands shake and the pit of her stomach grow cold?

He laughed softly.

Dont pull away! I wont hurt you!

Hurt me? Im not afraid of you, Rhett Butler, or of any man in shoe leather! she cried, furiousthat her voice shook as well as her hands.

An admirable sentiment, but do lower your voice. Mrs. Wilkes might hear you. And praycompose yourself. He sounded as though delighted at her flurry.

Scarlett, you do like me, dont you?

That was more like, what she was expecting.

Well, sometimes, she answered cautiously. When you arent acting like a varmint.

He laughed again and held the palm of her hand against his hard cheek.

I think you like me because I am a varmint. Youve known so few dyed-in-the-wool varmintsin your sheltered life that my very difference holds a quaint charm for you.

This was not the turn she had anticipated and she tried again without success to pull her handfree.

Thats not true! I like nice menmen you can depend on to always be gentlemanly.

You mean men you can always bully. Its merely a matter of definition. But no matter.

He kissed her palm again, and again the skin on the back of her neck crawled excitingly.

But you do like me. Could you ever love me, Scarlett?

Ah! she thought, triumphantly. Now Ive got him! And she answered with studied coolness:

Indeed, no. That isnot unless you mended your manners considerably.

And I have no intention of mending them. So you could not love me? That is as I hoped. Forwhile I like you immensely, I do not love you and it would be tragic indeed for you to suffer twicefrom unrequited love, wouldnt it, dear? May I call you dear, Mrs. Hamilton? I shall call youdear whether you like it or not, so no matter, but the proprieties must be observed.

You dont love me?

No, indeed. Did you hope that I did?

Dont be so presumptuous!

You hoped! Alas, to blight your hopes! I should love you, for you are charming and talented atmany useless accomplishments. But many ladies have charm and accomplishments and are just asuseless as you are. No, I dont love you. But I do like you tremendouslyfor the elasticity of yourconscience, for the selfishness which you seldom trouble to hide, and for the shrewd practicality inyou which, I fear, you get from some not too remote Irish-peasant ancestor.

Peasant! Why, he was insulting her! She began to splutter wordlessly.

Dont interrupt, he begged, squeezing her hand. I like you because I have those samequalities in me and like begets liking. I realize you still cherish the memory of the godlike andwooden-headed Mr. Wilkes, whos probably been in his grave these six months. But there must beroom in your heart for me too. Scarlett, do stop wriggling! I am making you a declaration. I have wanted you since the first time I laid eyes on you, in the hall of Twelve Oaks, when you werebewitching poor Charlie Hamilton. I want you more than I have ever wanted any womanandIve waited longer for you than Ive ever waited for any woman.

She was breathless with surprise at his last words. In spite of all his insults, he did love her andhe was just so contrary he didnt want to come out frankly and put it into words, for fear shedlaugh. Well, shed show him and right quickly.

Are you asking me to marry you?

He dropped her hand and laughed so loudly she shrank back in her chair.

Good Lord, no! Didnt I tell you I wasnt a marrying man?

Butbutwhat

He rose to his feet and, hand on heart, made her a burlesque bow.

Dear, he said quietly, I am complimenting your intelligence by asking you to be my mistresswithout having first seduced you.

Mistress!

Her mind shouted the word, shouted that she had been vilely insulted. But in that first startledmoment she did not feel insulted. She only felt a furious surge of indignation that he should thinkher such a fool. He must think her a fool if he offered her a proposition like that, instead of theproposal of matrimony she had been expecting. Rage, punctured vanity and disappointment threwher mind into a turmoil and, before she even thought of the high moral grounds on which sheshould upbraid him, she blurted out the first words which came to her lipsMistress! What would I get out of that except a passel of brats?

And then her jaw dropped in horror as she realized what she had said. He laughed until hechoked, peering at her in the shadows as she sat, stricken dumb, pressing her handkerchief to hermouth.

Thats why I like you! You are the only frank woman I know, the only woman who looks on thepractical side of matters without beclouding the issue with mouthings about sin and morality. Anyother woman would have swooned first and then shown me the door.

Scarlett leaped to her feet, her face red with shame. How could she have said such a thing! Howcould she, Ellens daughter, with her upbringing, have sat there and listened to such debasingwords and then made such a shameless reply? She should have screamed. She should have fainted.

She should have turned coldly away in silence and swept from the porch. Too late now!

I will show you the door, she shouted, not caring if Melanie or the Meades, down the street,did hear her. Get out! How dare you say such things to me! What have I ever done to encourageyouto make you suppose ... Get out and dont ever come back here. I mean it this time. Dontyou ever come back here with any of your piddling papers of pins and ribbons, thinking Ill forgiveyou. IllIll tell my father and hell kill you!

He picked up his hat and bowed and she saw in the light of the lamp that his teeth were showingin a smile beneath his mustache. He was not ashamed, he was amused at what she had said, and he was watching her with alert interest.

Oh, he was detestable! She swung round on her heel and marched into the house. She grabbedhold of the door to shut it with a bang, but the hook which held it open was too heavy for her. Shestruggled with it, panting.

May I help you? he asked.

Feeling that she would burst a blood vessel if she stayed another minute, she stormed up thestairs. And as she reached the upper floor, she heard him obligingly slam the door for her.

Chapter 20

AS THE HOT noisy days of August were drawing to a close the bombardment abruptly ceased.

The quiet that fell on the town was startling. Neighbors met on the streets and stared at oneanother, uncertain, uneasy, as to what might be impending. The stillness, after the screaming days,brought no surcease to strained nerves but, if possible, made the strain even worse. No one knewwhy the Yankee batteries were silent; there was no news of the troops except that they had beenwithdrawn in large numbers from the breastworks about the town and had marched off toward thesouth to defend the railroad. No one knew where the fighting was, if indeed there was any fighting,or how the battle was going if there was a battle.

Nowadays the only news was that which passed from mouth to mouth. Short of paper, short ofink, short of men, the newspapers had suspended publication after the siege began, and the wildestrumors appeared from nowhere and swept through the town. Now, in the anxious quiet, crowdsstormed General Hoods headquarters demanding information, crowds massed about the telegraphoffice and the depot hoping for tidings, good tidings, for everyone hoped that the silence ofShermans cannon meant that the Yankees were in full retreat and the Confederates chasing themback up the road to Dalton, But no news came. The telegraph wires were still, no trains came in onthe one remaining railroad from the south and the mail service was broken.

Autumn with its dusty, breathless heat was slipping in to choke the suddenly quiet town, addingits dry, panting weight to tired, anxious hearts. To Scarlett, mad to hear from Tara, yet trying tokeep up a brave face, it seemed an eternity since the siege began, seemed as though she had alwayslived with the sound of cannon in her ears until this sinister quiet had fallen. And yet, it was onlythirty days since the siege began. Thirty days of siege! The city ringed with red-clay rifle pits, themonotonous booming of cannon that never rested, the long lines of ambulances and ox cartsdripping blood down the dusty streets toward the hospitals, the overworked burial squads draggingout men when they were hardly cold and dumping them like so many logs in endless rows ofshallow ditches. Only thirty days!

And it was only four months since the Yankees moved south from Dalton! Only four months!

Scarlett thought, looking back on that far day, that it had occurred in another life. Oh, no! Surelynot just four months. It had been a lifetime.

Four months ago! Why, four months ago Dalton, Resaca, Kennesaw Mountain had been to heronly names of places on the railroad. Now they were battles, battles desperately, vainly fought as Johnston fell back toward Atlanta. And now, Peachtree Creek, Decatur, Ezra Church and UtoyCreek were no longer pleasant names of pleasant places. Never again could she think of them asquiet villages full of welcoming friends, as green places where she picnicked with handsomeofficers on the soft banks of slow-moving streams. These names meant battles too, and the softgreen grasses where she had sat were cut to bits by heavy cannon wheels, trampled by desperatefeet when bayonet met bayonet and flattened where bodies threshed in agonies. ... And the lazystreams were redder now than ever Georgia clay could make them. Peachtree Creek was crimson,so they said, after the Yankees crossed it. Peachtree Creek, Decatur, Ezra Church, Utoy Creek.

Never names of places any more. Names of graves where friends lay buried, names of tangledunderbrush and thick woods where bodies rotted unburied, names of the four sides of Atlantawhere Sherman had tried to force his army in and Hoods men had doggedly beaten him back.

At last, news came from the south to the strained town and it was alarming news, especially toScarlett. General Sherman was trying the fourth side of the town again, striking again at therailroad at Jonesboro. Yankees in large numbers were on that fourth side of the town now, noskirmishing units or cavalry detachments but the massed Yankee forces. And thousands ofConfederate troops had been withdrawn from the lines close about the city to hurl themselvesagainst them. And that explained the sudden silence.

Why Jonesboro? thought Scarlett, terror striking at her heart at the thought of Taras nearness.

Why must they always hit Jonesboro? Why cant they find some other place to attack therailroad?

For a week she had not heard from Tara and the last brief note from Gerald had added to herfears. Carreen had taken a turn for the worse and was very, very sick. Now it might be days beforethe mails came through, days before she heard whether Carreen was alive or dead. Oh, if she hadonly gone home at the beginning of the siege, Melanie or no Melanie!

There was fighting at Jonesborothat much Atlanta knew, but how the battle went no one couldtell and the most insane rumors tortured the town. Finally a courier came up from Jonesboro withthe reassuring news that the Yankees had been beaten back. But they had made a sortie intoJonesboro, burned the depot, cut the telegraph wires and torn up three miles of track before theyretreated. The engineering corps was working like mad, repairing the line, but it would take sometime because the Yankees had torn up the crossties, made bonfires of them, laid the wrenched-uprails across them until they were red hot and then twisted them around telegraph poles until theylooked like giant corkscrews. These days it was so hard to replace iron rails, to replace anythingmade of iron.

No, the Yankees hadnt gotten to Tara. The same courier who brought the dispatches to GeneralHood assured Scarlett of that He had met Gerald in Jonesboro after the battle, just as he wasstarting to Atlanta, and Gerald had begged him to bring a letter to her.

But what was Pa doing in Jonesboro? The young courier looked ill at ease as he made answer.

Gerald was hunting for an army doctor to go to Tara with him.

As she stood in the sunshine on the front porch, thanking the young man for his trouble, Scarlettfelt her knees go weak. Carreen must be dying if she was so far beyond Ellens medical skill thatGerald was hunting a doctor! As the courier went off in a small whirlwind of red dust, Scarlett tore open Geralds letter with fingers that trembled. So great was the shortage of paper in theConfederacy now that Geralds note was written between the lines of her last letter to him andreading it was difficult.

Dear Daughter, Your Mother and both girls have the typhoid. They are very ill but we musthope for the best. When your mother took to her bed she bade me write you that under nocondition were you to come home and expose yourself and Wade to the disease. She sends her loveand bids you pray for her.

Pray for her! Scarlett flew up the stairs to her room and, dropping on her knees by the bed,prayed as she had never prayed before. No formal Rosaries now but the same words over and over:

Mother of God, dont let her die! Ill be so good if you dont let her die! Please, dont let her die!

For the next week Scarlett crept about the house like a stricken animal, waiting for news,starting at every sound of horses hooves, rushing down the dark stair at night when soldiers cametapping at the door, but no news came from Tara. The width of the continent might have spreadbetween her and home instead of twenty-five miles of dusty road.

The mails were still disrupted, no one knew where the Confederates were or what the Yankeeswere up to. No one knew anything except that thousands; of soldiers, gray and blue, weresomewhere between Atlanta and Jonesboro. Not a word from Tara in a week.

Scarlett had seen enough typhoid in the Atlanta hospital to know what a week meant in thatdread disease. Ellen was ill, perhaps dying, and here was Scarlett helpless in Atlanta with apregnant woman on her hands and two armies between her and home. Ellen was illperhapsdying. But Ellen couldnt be ill! She had never been ill. The very thought was incredible and itstruck at the very foundations of the security of Scarletts life. Everyone else got sick, but neverEllen. Ellen looked after sick people and made them well again. She couldnt be sick. Scarlettwanted to be home. She wanted Tara with the desperate desire of a frightened child frantic for theonly haven it had ever known.

Home! The sprawling white house with fluttering white curtains at the windows, the thick cloveron the lawn with the bees busy in it, the little black boy on the front steps shooing the ducks andturkeys from the flower beds, the serene red fields and the miles and miles of cotton turning whitein the sun! Home!

If she had only gone home at the beginning of the siege, when everyone else was refugeeing!

She could have taken Melanie with her in safety with weeks to spare.

Oh, damn Melanie! she thought a thousand times. Why couldnt she have gone to Maconwith Aunt Pitty? Thats where she belongs, with her own kinfolks, not with me. Im none of herblood. Why does she hang onto me so hard? If shed only gone to Macon, then I could have gonehome to Mother. Even noweven now, Id take a chance on getting home in spite of the Yankees,if it wasnt for this baby. Maybe General Hood would give me an escort. Hes a nice man, GeneralHood, and I know I could make him give me an escort and a flag of truce to get me through thelines. But I have to wait for this baby! ... Oh, Mother! Mother! Dont die! ... Why dont this babyever come? Ill see Dr. Meade today and ask him if theres any way to hurry babies up so I can gohomeif I can get an escort. Dr. Meade said shed have a bad time. Dear God! Suppose she should die! Melanie dead. Melanie dead. And Ashley No, I mustnt think about that, it isnt nice.

But Ashley No, I mustnt think about that because hes probably dead, anyway. But he made mepromise Id take care of her. Butif I didnt take care of her and she died and Ashley is still alive No, I mustnt think about that Its sinful. And I promised God Id be good if He would just notlet Mother die. Oh, if the baby would only come. If I could only get away from hereget homeget anywhere but here.

Scarlett hated the sight of the ominously still town now and once she had loved it. Atlanta wasno longer the gay, the desperately gay place she had loved. It was a hideous place like a plague-stricken city so quiet, so dreadfully quiet after the din of the siege. There had been stimulation inthe noise and the danger of the shelling. There was only horror in the quiet that followed. The townseemed haunted, haunted with fear and uncertainty and memories. Peoples faces looked pinchedand the few soldiers Scarlett saw wore the exhausted look of racers forcing themselves on throughthe last lap of a race already lost.

The last day of August came and with it convincing rumors that the fiercest fighting since thebattle of Atlanta was taking place. Somewhere to the south. Atlanta, waiting for news of the turn ofbattle, stopped even trying to laugh and joke. Everyone knew now what the soldiers had knowntwo weeks beforethat Atlanta was in the last ditch, that if the Macon railroad fell, Atlanta wouldfall too.

On the morning of the first of September, Scarlett awoke with a suffocating sense of dread uponher, a dread she had taken to her pillow the night before. She thought, dulled with sleep: Whatwas it I was worrying about when I went to bed last night? Oh, yes, the fighting. There was abattle, somewhere, yesterday! Oh, who won? She sat up hastily, rubbing her eyes, and her worriedheart took up yesterdays load again.

The air was oppressive even in the early morning hour, hot with the scorching promise of a noonof glaring blue sky and pitiless bronze sun. The road outside lay silent No wagons creaked by. Notroops raised the red dust with their tramping feet. There were no sounds of negroes lazy voices inneighboring kitchens, no pleasant sounds of breakfasts being prepared, for all the near neighborsexcept Mrs. Meade and Mrs. Merriwether had refugeed to Macon. And she could hear nothingfrom their houses either. Farther down the street the business section was quiet and many of thestores and offices were locked and boarded up, while their occupants were somewhere about thecountryside with rifles in their hands.

The stillness that greeted her seemed even more sinister this morning than on any of themornings of the queer quiet week preceding it. She rose hastily, without her usual preliminaryburrowings and stretchings, and went to the window, hoping to see some neighbors face, someheartening sight. But the road was empty. She noted how the leaves on the trees were still darkgreen but dry and heavily coated with red dust, and how withered and sad the untended flowers inthe front yard looked.

As she stood, looking out of the window, there came to her ears a far-off sound, faint and sullenas the first distant thunder of an approaching storm.

Rain, she thought in the first moment, and her country-bred mind added, we certainly needit. But, in a split instant: Rain? No! Not rain! Cannon!

Her heart racing, she leaned from the window, her ear cocked to the far-off roaring, trying todiscover from which direction it came. But the dim thundering was so distant that, for a moment,she could not tell. Make it from Marietta, Lord! she prayed. Or Decatur. Or Peachtree Creek.

But not from the south! Not from the south! She gripped the window still tighter and strained herears and the far-away booming seemed louder. And it was coming from the south.

Cannon to the south! And to the south lay Jonesboro and Taraand Ellen.

Yankees perhaps at Tara, now, this minute! She listened again but the blood thudding in her earsall but blurred out the sound of far-off firing. No, they couldnt be at Jonesboro yet. If they werethat far away, the sound would be fainter, more indistinct. But they must be at least ten miles downthe road toward Jonesboro, probably near the little settlement of Rough and Ready. But Jonesborowas scarcely more than ten miles below Rough and Ready.

Cannon to the south, and they might be tolling the knell of Atlantas fall. But to Scarlett, sick forher mothers safety, fighting to the south only meant fighting near Tara. She walked the floor andwrung her hands and for the first time the thought in all its implications came to her that the grayarmy might be defeated. It was the thought of Shermans thousands so close to Tara that brought itall home to her, brought the full horror of the war to her as no sound of siege guns shatteringwindowpanes, no privations of food and clothing and no endless rows of dying men had done.

Shermans army within a few miles of Tara! And even if the Yankees should be defeated, theymight fall back down the road to Tara. And Gerald couldnt possibly refugee out of their way withthree sick women.

Oh, if she were only there now, Yankees or not She paced the floor in her bare feet, hernightgown clinging to her legs and the more she walked the stronger became her foreboding. Shewanted to be at home. She wanted to be near Ellen.

From the kitchen below, she heard the rattle of china as Prissy prepared breakfast, but no soundof Mrs. Meades Betsy. The shrill, melancholy minor of Prissy was raised, Jes a few mo days, tertote de wee-ry load ... The song grated on Scarlett, its sad implications frightening her, andslipping on a wrapper she pattered out into the hall and to the back stairs and shouted: Shut upthat singing, Prissy!

A sullen Yasm drifted up to her and she drew a deep breath, feeling suddenly ashamed ofherself.

Wheres Betsy?

Ah doan know. She ain came.

Scarlett walked to Melanies door and opened it a crack, peering into the sunny room. Melanielay in bed in her nightgown, her eyes closed and circled with black, her heart-shaped face bloated,her slender body hideous and distorted. Scarlett wished viciously that Ashley could see her now.

She looked worse than any pregnant woman she had ever seen. As she looked, Melanies eyesopened and a soft warm smile lit her face.

Come in, she invited, turning awkwardly on her side. Ive been awake since sun-up thinking,and, Scarlett, theres something I want to ask you.

She entered the room and sat down on the bed that was glaring with harsh sunshine.

Melanie reached out and took Scarletts hand in a gentle confiding clasp.

Dear, she said, Im sorry about the cannon. Its toward Jonesboro, isnt it?

Scarlett said Um, her heart beginning to beat faster as the thought recurred.

I know how worried you are. I know youd have gone home last week when you heard aboutyour mother, if it hadnt been for me. Wouldnt you?

Yes, said Scarlett ungraciously.

Scarlett, darling. Youve been so good to me. No sister could have been sweeter or braver. AndI love you for it. Im so sorry Im in the way.

Scarlett stared. Loved her, did she? The fool!

And Scarlett, Ive been lying here thinking and I want to ask a very great favor of you. Herclasp tightened. If I should die, will you take my baby?

Melanies eyes were wide and bright with soft urgency.

Will you?

Scarlett jerked away her hand as fear swamped her. Fear roughened her voice as she spoke.

Oh, dont be a goose, Melly. You arent going to die. Every woman thinks shes going to diewith her first baby. I know I did.

No, you didnt Youve never been afraid of anything. You are just saying that to try to cheer meup. Im not afraid to die but Im so afraid to leave the baby, if Ashley is Scarlett, promise methat youll take my baby if I should die. Then I wont be afraid. Aunt Pittypat is too old to raise achild and Honey and India are sweet butI want you to have my baby. Promise me, Scarlett Andif its a boy, bring him up like Ashley, and if its a girldear, Id like her to be like you.

Gods nightgown! cried Scarlett, leaping from the bed. Arent things bad enough without youtalking about dying?

Im sorry, dear. But promise me. I think itll be today. Im sure itll be today. Please promiseme.

Oh, all right, I promise, said Scarlett, looking down at her in bewilderment.

Was Melanie such a fool she really didnt know how she cared for Ashley? Or did she knoweverything and feel that because of that love, Scarlett would take good care of Ashleys child?

Scarlett had a wild impulse to cry out questions, but they died on her lips as Melanie took her handand held it for an instant against her cheek. Tranquility had come back into her eyes.

Why do you think it will be today, Melly?

Ive been having pains since dawnbut not very bad ones.

You have? Well, why didnt you call me? Ill send Prissy for Dr. Meade.

No, dont do that yet, Scarlett. You know how busy he is, how busy they all are. Just send wordto him that well need him some time today. Send over to Mrs. Meades and tell her and ask her tocome over and sit with me. Shell know when to really send for him.

Oh, stop being so unselfish. You know you need a doctor as much as anybody in the hospital.

Ill send for him right away.

No, please dont. Sometimes it takes all day having a baby and I just couldnt let the doctor sithere for hours when all those poor boys need him so much. Just send for Mrs. Meade. Shellknow.

Oh, all right, said Scarlett.

Chapter 21

AFTER SENDING UP Melanies breakfast tray, Scarlett dispatched Prissy for Mrs. Meade andsat down with Wade to eat her own breakfast. But for once she had no appetite. Between hernervous apprehension over the thought that Melanies time was approaching and her unconsciousstraining to hear the sound of the cannon, she could hardly eat. Her heart acted very queerly,beating regularly for several minutes and then thumping so loudly and swiftly it almost made hersick at her stomach. The heavy hominy stuck in her throat like glue and never before had themixture of parched corn and ground-up yams that passed for coffee been so repulsive. Withoutsugar or cream it was bitter as gall, for the sorghum used for long sweetening did little toimprove the taste. After one swallow she pushed her cup away. If for no other reason she hated theYankees because they kept her from having real coffee with sugar and thick cream in it.

Wade was quieter than usual and did not set up his every morning complaint against the hominythat he so disliked. He ate silently the spoonfuls she pushed into his mouth and washed them downwith noisily gulped water. His soft brown eyes followed her every movement, large, round asdollars, childish bewilderment in them though her own scarce-hidden fears had been communic(a) atedto him.When he hadfinished sh(as) e sent him off to the back yard to play and watchedhim toddle across the straggling grass to his playhouse with great relief.

She arose and stood irresolutely at the foot of the stairs. She should go up and sit with Melanieand distract her mind from her coming ordeal but she did not feel equal to it. Of all days in theworld, Melanie had to pick this day to have the baby! And of all days to talk about dying!

She sat down on the bottom step of the stairs and tried to compose herself, wondering again howyesterdays battle had gone, wondering how todays fighting was going. How strange to have a bigbattle going on just a few miles away and to know nothing of it! How strange the quiet of thisdeserted end of town in contrast with the day of the fighting at Peachtree Creek! Aunt Pittys housewas one of the last on the north side of Atlanta and with the fighting somewhere to the far south,there were no reinforcements going by at double-quick, no ambulances and staggering lines ofwalking wounded coming back. She wondered if such scenes were being enacted on the south sideof town and thanked God she was not there. If only everyone except the Meades and the Merriwethers had not refugeed from this north end of Peachtree! It made her feel forsaken andalone. She wished fervently that Uncle Peter were with her so he could go down to headquartersand learn the news. If it wasnt for Melanie shed go to town this very minute and learn for herself,but she couldnt leave until Mrs. Meade arrived. Mrs. Meade. Why didnt she come on? And wherewas Prissy?

She rose and went out onto the front porch and looked for them impatiently, but the Meadehouse was around a shady bend in the street and she could see no one. After a long while Prissycame into view, alone, switching her skirts from side to side and looking over her shoulder toobserve the effect.

Youre as slow as molasses in January, snapped Scarlett as Prissy opened the gate. What didMrs. Meade say? How soon will she be over here?

She warnt dar, said Prissy.

Where is she? When will she be home?

Welm, answered Prissy, dragging out her words pleasurably to give more weight to hermessage. Dey Cookie say Miss Meade done got wud early dis mawnin dat young Mist Phil donebeen shot an Miss Meade she tuck de cahige an Ole Talbot an Betsy an dey done gone ter fotchhim home. Cookie say he bad hurt an Miss Meade ain gwine ter be studyin bout comin uphyah.

Scarlett stared at her and had an impulse to shake her. Negroes were always so proud of beingthe bearers of evil tidings.

Well, dont stand there like a ninny. Go down to Mrs. Merriwethers and ask her to come up orsend her mammy. Now, hurry.

Dey ain dar, Miss Scarlett. Ah drapped in ter pass time of de day wid Mammy on mah wayhome. Deys done gone. House all locked up. Spec deys at de horsepittle.

So thats where you were so long! Whenever I send you somewhere you go where I tell youand dont stop to pass any time with anybody. Go

She stopped and racked her brain. Who was left in town among their friends who would behelpful? There was Mrs. Elsing. Of course, Mrs. Elsing didnt like her at all these days but she hadalways been fond of Melanie.

Go to Mrs. Elsings, and explain everything very carefully and ten her to please come up here.

And, Prissy, listen to me. Miss Mellys baby is due and she may need you any minute now. Nowyou hurry right straight back.

Yasm, said Prissy and, turning, sauntered down the walk at snails gait.

Hurry, you slow poke!

Yasm.

Prissy quickened her gait infinitesimally and Scarlett went back into the house. She hesitatedagain before going upstairs to Melanie. She would have to explain to her just why Mrs. Meadecouldnt come and the knowledge that Phil Meade was badly wounded might upset her. Well, shed tell a lie about it.

She entered Melanies room and saw that the breakfast tray was untouched. Melanie lay on herside, her face white.

Mrs. Meades over at the hospital, said Scarlett But Mrs. Rising is coming. Do you feelbad?

Not very, lied Melanie. Scarlett, how long did it take Wade to get born?

Less than no time, answered Scarlett with a cheerfulness she was far from feeling. I was outin the yard and I didnt hardly have time to get into the house. Mammy said it was scandalousjust like one of the darkies.

I hope Ill be like one of the darkies too, said Melanie, mustering a smile which suddenlydisappeared as pain contorted her face.

Scarlett looked down at Melanies tiny hips with none too sanguine hopes but said reassuringly:

Oh, its not really so bad.

Oh, I know it isnt. Im afraid Im a little coward. Isis Mrs. Elsing coming right away?

Yes, right away, said Scarlett. Ill go down and get some fresh water and sponge you off. Itsso hot today.

She took as long a time as possible in getting the water, running to the front door every twominutes to see if Prissy were coming. There was no sign of Prissy so she went back upstairs,sponged Melanies perspiring body and combed out her long dark hair.

When an hour had passed she heard scuffing negro feet coming down the street, and looking outof the window, saw Prissy returning slowly, switching herself as before and tossing her head withas many airy affectations as if she had a large and interested audience.

Some day, Im going to take a strap to that little wench, thought Scarlett savagely, hurryingdown the stairs to meet her.

Miss Elsing ober at de horsepittle. Dey Cookie lows a whole lot of wounded sojers come in onde early train. Cookie fixin soup ter tek over dar. She say

Never mind what she said, interrupted Scarlett, her heart sinking. Put on a clean apronbecause I want you to go over to the hospital. Im going to give you a note to Dr. Meade, and if heisnt there, give it to Dr. Jones or any of the other doctors. And if you dont hurry back this time,Ill skin you alive.

Yasm.

And ask any of the gentlemen for news of the fighting. If they dont know, go by the depot andask the engineers who brought the wounded in. Ask if they are fighting at Jonesboro or near there.

Gawdlmighty, Miss Scarlett! and sudden fright was in Prissys black face. De Yankees ain atTara, is dey?

I dont know. Im telling you to ask for news.

Gawdlmighty, Miss Scarlett! Whutll dey do ter Maw?

Prissy began to bawl suddenly, loudly, the sound adding to Scarletts own uneasiness.

Stop bawling! Miss Melanie will hear you. Now go change your apron, quick.

Spurred to speed, Prissy hurried toward the back of the house while Scarlett scratched a hastynote on the margin of Geralds last letter to herthe only bit of paper in the house. As she foldedit, so that her note was uppermost, she caught Geralds words, Your mothertyphoidunder noconditionto come home She almost sobbed. If it wasnt for Melanie, shed start home, rightthis minute, if she had to walk every step of the way.

Prissy went off at a trot, the letter gripped in her hand, and Scarlett went back upstairs, trying tothink of some plausible lie to explain Mrs. Elsings failure to appear. But Melanie asked noquestions. She lay upon her back, her face tranquil and sweet, and the sight of her quieted Scarlettfor a while.

She sat down and tried to talk of inconsequential things, but the thoughts of Tara and a possibledefeat by the Yankees, prodded cruelly. She thought of Ellen dying and of the Yankees coming intoAtlanta, burning everything, killing everybody. Through it all, the dull far-off thundering persisted,rolling into her ears in waves of fear. Finally, she could not talk at all and only stared out of thewindow at the hot still street and the dusty leaves hanging motionless on the trees. Melanie wassilent too, but at intervals her quiet face was wrenched with pain.

She said, after each pain: It wasnt very bad, really, and Scarlett knew she was lying. Shewould have preferred a loud scream to silent endurance. She knew she should feel sorry forMelanie, but somehow she could not muster a spark of sympathy. Her mind was too torn with herown anguish. Once she looked sharply at the pain-twisted face and wondered why it should be thatshe, of all people in the world, should be here with Melanie at this particular timeshe who hadnothing in common with her, who hated her, who would gladly have seen her dead. Well, maybeshed have her wish, and before the day was over too. A cold superstitious fear swept her at thisthought. It was bad luck to wish that someone were dead, almost as bad luck as to curse someone.

Curses came home to roost, Mammy said. She hastily prayed that Melanie wouldnt die and brokeinto feverish small talk, hardly aware of what she said. At last, Melanie put a hot hand on her wrist.

Dont bother about talking, dear. I know how worried you are. Im so sorry Im so muchtrouble.

Scarlett relapsed into silence but she could not sit still. What would she do if neither the doctornor Prissy got there in time? She walked to the window and looked down the street and came backand sat down again. Then she rose and looked out of the window on the other side of the room.

An hour went by and then another. Noon came and the sun was high and hot and not a breath ofair stirred the dusty leaves. Melanies pains were harder now. Her long hair was drenched in sweatand her gown stuck in wet spots to her body. Scarlett sponged her face in silence but fear wasgnawing at her. God in Heaven, suppose the baby came before the doctor arrived! What would shedo? She knew less than nothing of midwifery. This was exactly the emergency she had beendreading for weeks. She had been counting on Prissy to handle the situation if no doctor should beavailable. Prissy knew all about midwifery. Shed said so time and again. But where was Prissy?

Why didnt she come? Why didnt the doctor come? She went to the window and looked again.

She listened hard and suddenly she wondered if it were only her imagination or if the sound ofcannon in the distance had died away. If it were farther away it would mean that the fighting wasnearer Jonesboro and that would meanAt last she saw Prissy coming down the street at a quick trot and she leaned out of the window.

Prissy, looking up, saw her and her mouth opened to yell. Seeing the panic written on the littleblack face and fearing she might alarm Melanie by crying out evil tidings, Scarlett hastily put herfinger to her lips and left the window.

Ill get some cooler water, she said, looking down into Melanies dark, deep-circled eyes andtrying to smile. Then she hastily left the room, closing the door carefully behind her.

Prissy was sitting on the bottom step in the hall, panting.

Deys fightin at Jonesboro, Miss Scarlett! Dey say our gempmums is gittin beat. Oh, Gawd,Miss Scarlett! Whutll happen ter Maw an Poke? Oh, Gawd, Miss Scarlett! Whutll happen ter useffen de Yankees gits hyah? Oh, Gawd

Scarlett clapped a hand over the blubbery mouth.

For Gods sake, hush!

Yes, what would happen to them if the Yankees camewhat would happen to Tara? She pushedthe thought firmly back into her mind and grappled with the more pressing emergency. If shethought of these things, shed begin to scream and bawl like Prissy.

Wheres Dr. Meade? Whens he coming?

Ah ain nebber seed him, Miss Scarlett.

What!

Nom, he ain at de horsepittle. Miss Merriwether an Miss Elsing ain dar needer. A man hetole me de doctah down by de car shed wid the wounded sojers jes come in frum Jonesboro, butMiss Scarlett, Ah wuz sceered ter go down dar ter de sheddeys folkses dyin down dar. Ahssceered of daid folkses

What about the other doctors?

Miss Scarlett, fo Gawd, Ah couldn sceercely git one of dem ter read yo note. Dey wukin inde horsepittle lak dey all done gone crazy. One doctah he say ter me, Damn yo hide! Doan youcome roun hyah bodderin me bout babies wen we got a mess of men dyin hyah. Git somewoman ter hep you. An den Ah went aroun an about an ask fer news lak you done tole me an

dey all say fightin at Jonesboro an Ah

You say Dr. Meades at the depot?

Yasm. He

Now, listen sharp to me. Im going to get Dr. Meade and I want you to sit by Miss Melanie anddo anything she says. And if you so much as breathe to her where the fighting is, Ill sell you Southas sure as guns iron. And dont you tell her that the other doctors wouldnt come either. Do youhear?

Yasm.

Wipe your eyes and get a fresh pitcher of water and go on up. Sponge her off. Tell her Ivegone for Dr. Meade.

Is her time nigh, Miss Scarlett?

I dont know. Im afraid it is but I dont know. You should know. Go on up.

Scarlett caught up her wide straw bonnet from the console table and jammed it on her head. Shelooked in the mirror and automatically pushed up loose strands of hair but she did not see her ownreflection. Cold little ripples of fear that started in the pit of her stomach were radiating outwarduntil the fingers that touched her cheeks were cold, though the rest of her body streamed perspiration.

She hurried out of the house and into the heat of the sun. It was blindingly, glaring hot and asshe hurried down Peachtree Street her temples began to throb from the heat. From far down thestreet she could hear the rise and fall and roar of many voices. By the time she caught sight of theLeyden house, she was beginning to pant, for her stays were tightly laced, but she did not slow hergait. The roar of noise grew louder.

From the Leyden house down to Five Points, the street seethed with activity, the activity of ananthill just destroyed. Negroes were running up and down the street, panic in their faces; and onporches, white children sat crying untended. The street was crowded with army wagons andambulances filled with wounded and carriages piled high with valises and pieces of furniture. Menon horseback dashed out of side streets pell-mell down Peachtree toward Hoods headquarters. Infront of the Bonnell house, old Amos stood holding the head of the carriage horse and he greetedScarlett with rolling eyes.

Aint you gone yit, Miss Scarlett? We is goin now. Ole Miss packin her bag.

Going? Where?

Gawd knows, Miss. Somewheres. De Yankees is comin!

She hurried on, not even saying good-by. The Yankees were coming! At Wesley Chapel, shepaused to catch her breath and wait for her hammering heart to subside. If she did not quiet herselfshe would certainly faint As she stood clutching a lamp post for support, she saw an officer onhorseback come charging up the street from Five Points and, on an impulse, she ran out into thestreet and waved at him.

Oh, stop! Please, stop!

He reined in so suddenly the horse went back on its haunches, pawing the air. There were harshlines of fatigue and urgency in his face but his tattered gray hat was off with a sweep.

Madam?

Tell me, is it true? Are the Yankees coming?

Im afraid so.

Do you know so?

Yes, Mam. I know so. A dispatch came in to headquarters half an hour ago from the fighting at Jonesboro.

At Jonesboro? Are you sure?

Im sure. Theres no use telling pretty lies, Madam. The message was from General Hardee andit said: I have lost the battle and am in full retreat.

Oh, my God!

The dark face of the tired man looked down without emotion. He gathered the reins again andput on his hat.

Oh, sir, please, just a minute. What shall we do?

Madam, I cant say. The army is evacuating Atlanta soon.

Going off and leaving us to the Yankees?

Im afraid so.

The spurred horse went off as though on springs and Scarlett was left standing in the middle ofthe street with the red dust thick upon her ankles.

The Yankees were coming. The army was leaving. The Yankees were coming. What should shedo? Where should she run? No, she couldnt run. There was Melanie back there in the bedexpecting that baby. Oh, why did women have babies? If it wasnt for Melanie she could takeWade and Prissy and hide in the woods where the Yankees could never find them. But she couldnttake Melanie to the woods. No, not now. Oh, if shed only had the baby sooner, yesterday even,perhaps they could get an ambulance and take her away and hide her somewhere. But nowshemust find Dr. Meade and make him come home with her. Perhaps he could hurry the baby.

She gathered up her skirts and ran down the street, and the rhythm of her feet was The Yankeesare coming! The Yankees are coming! Five Points was crowded with people who rushed here andthere with unseeing eyes, jammed with wagons, ambulances, ox carts, carriages loaded withwounded. A roaring sound like the breaking of surf rose from the crowd.

Then a strangely incongruous sight struck her eyes. Throngs of women were coming up fromthe direction of the railroad tracks carrying hams across their shoulders. Little children hurried bytheir sides, staggering under buckets of steaming molasses. Young boys dragged sacks of corn andpotatoes. One old man struggled along with a small barrel of flour on a wheelbarrow. Men, womenand children, black and white, hurried, hurried with straining faces, lugging packages and sacksand boxes of foodmore food than she had seen in a year. The crowd suddenly gave a lane for acareening carriage and through the lane came the frail and elegant Mrs. Elsing, standing up in thefront of her victoria, reins in one hand, whip in the other. She was hatless and white faced and herlong gray hair streamed down her back as she lashed the horse like a Fury. Jouncing on the backseat of the carriage was her black mammy, Melissy, clutching a greasy side of bacon to her withone hand, while with the other and both feet she attempted to hold the boxes and bags piled allabout her. One bag of dried peas had burst and the peas strewed themselves into the street Scarlettscreamed to her, but the tumult of the crowd drowned her voice and the carriage rocked madly by.

For a moment she could not understand what it all meant and then, remembering that thecommissary warehouses were down by the railroad tracks, she realized that the army had thrown them open to the people to salvage what they could before the Yankees came.

She pushed her way swiftly through the crowds, past the packed, hysterical mob surging in theopen space of Five Points, and hurried as fast as she could down the short block toward the depot.

Through the tangle of ambulances and the clouds of dust, she could see doctors and stretcherbearers bending, lifting, hurrying. Thank God, shed find Dr. Meade soon. As she rounded thecorner of the Atlanta Hotel and came in full view of the depot and the tracks, she halted appalled.

Lying in the pitiless sun, shoulder to shoulder, head to feet, were hundreds of wounded men,lining the tracks, the sidewalks, stretched out in endless rows under the car shed. Some lay stiffand still but many writhed under the hot sun, moaning. Everywhere, swarms of flies hovered overthe men, crawling and buzzing in their faces, everywhere was blood, dirty bandages, groans,screamed curses of pain as stretcher bearers lifted men. The smell of sweat, of blood, of unwashedbodies, of excrement rose up in waves of blistering heat until the fetid stench almost nauseated her.

The ambulance men hurrying here and there among the prostrate forms frequently stepped onwounded men, so thickly packed were the rows, and those trodden upon stared stolidly up, waitingtheir turn.

She shrank back, clapping her hand to her mouth feeling that she was going to vomit. Shecouldnt go on. She had seen wounded men in the hospitals, wounded men on Aunt Pittys lawnafter the fighting at the creek, but never anything like this. Never anything like these stinking,bleeding bodies broiling under the glaring sun. This was an inferno of pain and smell and noiseand hurryhurryhurry! The Yankees are coming! The Yankees are coming! She braced hershoulders and went down among them, straining her eyes among the upright figures to distinguishDr. Meade. But she discovered she could not look for him, for if she did not step carefully shewould tread on some poor soldier. She raised her skirts and tried to pick her way among themtoward a knot of men who were directing the stretcher bearers.

As she walked, feverish hands plucked at her skirt and voices croaked: Ladywater! Please,lady, water! For Christs sake, water!

Perspiration came down her face in streams as she pulled her skirts from clutching hands. If shestepped on one of these men, shed scream and faint. She stepped over dead men, over men wholay dull eyed with hands clutched to bellies where dried blood had glued torn uniforms to wounds,over men whose beards were stiff with blood and from whose broken jaws came sounds whichmust mean:

Water! Water!

If she did not find Dr. Meade soon, she would begin screaming with hysteria. She looked towardthe group of men under the car shed and cried as loudly as she could: Dr. Meade! Is Dr. Meadethere?

From the group one man detached himself and looked toward her. It was the doctor. He wascoatless and his sleeves were rolled up to his shoulders. His shirt and trousers were as red as abutchers and even the end of his iron-gray beard was matted with blood. His face was the face of aman drunk with fatigue and impotent rage and burning pity. It was gray and dusty, and sweat hadstreaked long rivulets across his cheeks. But his voice was calm and decisive as he called to her.

Thank God, you are here. I can use every pair of hands.

For a moment she stared at him bewildered, dropping her skirts in dismay. They fell over thedirty face of a wounded man who feebly tried to turn his head to escape from their smotheringfolds. What did the doctor mean? The dust from the ambulances came into her face with chokingdryness, and the rotten smells were like a foul liquid in her nostrils.

Hurry, child! Come here.

She picked up her skirts and went to him as fast as she could go across the rows of bodies. Sheput her hand on his arm and felt that it was trembling with weariness but there was no weakness inhis face.

Oh, Doctor! she cried. You must come. Melanie is having her baby.

He looked at her as if her words did not register on his mind. A man who lay upon the ground ather feet, his head pillowed on his canteen, grinned up companionably at her words.

They will do it, he said cheerfully.

She did not even look down but shook the doctors arm.

Its Melanie. The baby. Doctor, you must come. She the This was no time for delicacybut it was hard to bring out the words with the ears of hundreds of strange men listening.

The pains are getting hard. Please, Doctor!

A baby? Great God! thundered the doctor and his face was suddenly contorted with hate andrage, a rage not directed at her or at anyone except a world wherein such things could happen.

Are you crazy? I cant leave these men. They are dying, hundreds of them. I cant leave them fora damned baby. Get some woman to help you. Get my wife.

She opened her mouth to ten him why Mrs. Meade could not come and then shut it abruptly. Hedid not know his own son was wounded! She wondered if he would still be here if he did know,and something told her that even if Phil were dying he would still be standing on this spot, givingaid to the many instead of the one.

No, you must come, Doctor. You know you said shed have a hard time Was it really she,Scarlett, standing here saying these dreadful indelicate things at the top of her voice in this hell ofheat and groans? Shell die if you dont come!

He shook off her hand roughly and spoke as though he hardly heard her, hardly knew what shesaid.

Die? Yes, theyll all dieall these men. No bandages, no salves, no quinine, no chloroform.

Oh, God, for some morphia! Just a little morphia for the worst ones. Just a little chloroform. Goddamn the Yankees! God damn the Yankees!

Give um hell, Doctor! said the man on the ground, his teeth showing in his beard.

Scarlett began to shake and her eyes burned with tears of fright. The doctor wasnt coming withher. Melanie would die and she had wished that she would die. The doctor wasnt coming.

Name of God, Doctor! Please!

Dr. Meade bit his lip and his jaw hardened as his face went cool again.

Child, Ill try. I cant promise you. But Ill try. When we get these men tended to. The Yankeesare coming and the troops are moving out of town. I dont know what theyll do with the wounded.

There arent any trains. The Macon line has been captured. ... But Ill try. Run along now. Dontbother me. Theres nothing much to bringing a baby. Just tie up the cord.

He turned as an orderly touched his arm and began firing directions and pointing to this and thatwounded man. The man at her feet looked up at Scarlett compassionately. She turned away, for thedoctor had forgotten her.

She picked her way rapidly through the wounded and back to Peachtree Street. The doctorwasnt coming. She would have to see it through herself. Thank God, Prissy knew all aboutmidwifery. Her head ached from the heat and she could feel her basque, soaking wet fromperspiration, sticking to her. Her mind felt numb and so did her legs, numb as in a nightmare whenshe tried to run and could not move them. She thought of the long walk back to the house and itseemed interminable.

Then, The Yankees are coming! began to beat its refrain in her mind again. Her heart began topound and new life came into her limbs. She hurried into the crowd at Five Points, now so thickthere was no room on the narrow sidewalks and she was forced to walk in the street. Long lines ofsoldiers were passing, dust covered, sodden with weariness. There seemed thousands of them,bearded, dirty, their guns slung over their shoulders, swiftly passing at route step. Cannon rolledpast, the drivers flaying the thin mules with lengths of rawhide. Commissary wagons with torncanvas covers rocked through the ruts. Cavalry raising clouds of choking dust went past endlessly.

She had never seen so many soldiers together before. Retreat! Retreat! The army was moving out.

The hurrying lines pushed her back onto the packed sidewalk and she smelled the reek of cheapcorn whisky. There were women in the mob near Decatur Street, garishly dressed women whosebright finery and painted faces gave a discordant note of holiday. Most of them were drunk and thesoldiers on whose arms they hung were drunker. She caught a fleeting glimpse of a head of redcurls and saw that creature, Belle Watling, heard her shrill drunken laughter as she clung forsupport to a one-armed soldier who reeled and staggered.

When she had shoved and pushed her way through the mob for a block beyond Five Points thecrowd thinned a little and, gathering up her skirts, she began to run again. When she reachedWesley Chapel, she was breathless and dizzy and sick at her stomach. Her stays were cutting herribs in two. She sank down on the steps of the church and buried her head in her hands until shecould breathe more easily. If she could only get one deep breath, way down in her abdomen. If herheart would only stop bumping and drumming and cavorting. If there were only someone in thismad place to whom she could turn.

Why, she had never had to do a thing for herself in all her life. There had always been someoneto do things for her, to look after her, shelter and protect her and spoil her. It was incredible thatshe could be in such a fix. Not a friend, not a neighbor to help her. There had always been friends,neighbors, the competent hands of willing slaves. And now in this hour of greatest need, there wasno one. It was incredible that she could be so completely alone, and frightened, and far from home.

Home! If she were only home, Yankees or no Yankees. Home, even if Ellen was sick. Shelonged for the sight of Ellens sweet face, for Mammys strong arms around her.

She rose dizzily to her feet and started walking again. When she came in sight of the house, shesaw Wade swinging on the front gate. When he saw her, his face puckered and he began to cry,holding up a grubby bruised finger.

Hurt! he sobbed. Hurt!

Hush! Hush! Hush! Or Ill spank you. Go out in the back yard and make mud pies and dontmove from there.

Wade hungwy, he sobbed and put tin hurt finger in his mouth.

I dont care. Go in the back yard and She looked up and saw Prissy leaning out of theupstairs window, fright and worry written on her face; but in an instant they were wiped away inrelief as she saw her mistress. Scarlett beckoned to her to come down and went into the house.

How cool it was in the hall. She untied her bonnet and flung it on the table, drawing her forearmsacross her wet forehead. She heard the upstairs door open and a low wailing moan, wrenched fromthe depths of agony, came to her ears. Prissy came down the stairs three at a time.

Is de doctah come?

No. He cant come.

Gawd, Miss Scarlett! Miss Melly bad off!

The doctor cant come. Nobody can come. Youve got to bring the baby and Ill help you.

Prissys mouth fell open and her tongue wagged wordlessly. She looked at Scarlett sideways andscuffed her feet and twisted her thin body.

Dont look so simple minded! cried Scarlett, infuriated at her silly expression. Whats thematter?

Prissy edged back up the stairs.

Fo Gawd, Miss Scarlett Fright and shame were in her rolling eyes.

Well?

Fo Gawd, Miss Scarlett! Wes got ter have a doctah. AhAhMiss Scarlett, Ah doan knownuthin bout bringin babies. Maw wouldn nebber lemme be round folkses whut wuz havin

dem.

All the breath went out of Scarletts lungs in one gasp of horror before rage swept her. Prissymade a lunge past her, bent on flight, but Scarlett grabbed her.

You black liarwhat do you mean? Youve been saying you knew everything about birthingbabies. What is the truth? Tell me! She shook her until the kinky head rocked drunkenly.

Ahs lyin, Miss Scarlett! Ah doan know huccome Ah tell sech a lie. Ah jes see one babybirthed, an Maw she lak ter wo me out fer watchin.

Scarlett glared at her and Prissy shrank back, trying to pull loose. For a moment her mind refused to accept the truth, but when realization finally came to her that Prissy knew no more aboutmidwifery than she did, anger went over her like a flame. She had never struck a slave in all herlife, but now she slapped the black cheek with all the force in her tired arm. Prissy screamed at thetop of her voice, more from fright than pain, and began to dance up and down, writhing to breakScarletts grip.

As she screamed, the moaning from the second floor ceased and a moment later Melaniesvoice, weak and trembling, called: Scarlett? Is it you? Please come! Please!

Scarlett dropped Prissys arm and the wench sank whimpering to the steps. For a momentScarlett stood still, looking up, listening to the low moaning which had begun again. As she stoodthere, it seemed as though a yoke descended heavily upon her neck, felt as though a heavy loadwere harnessed to it, a load she would feel as soon as she took a step.

She tried to think of all the things Mammy and Ellen had done for her when Wade was born butthe merciful blurring of the childbirth pains obscured almost everything in mist. She did recall afew things and she spoke to Prissy rapidly, authority in her voice.

Build a fire in the stove and keep hot water boiling in the kettle. And bring up all the towelsyou can find and that ball of twine. And get me the scissors. Dont come telling me you cant findthem. Get them and get them quick. Now hurry.

She jerked Prissy to her feet and sent her kitchenwards with a shove. Then she squared hershoulders and started up the stairs. It was going to be difficult, telling Melanie that she and Prissywere to deliver her baby.

Chapter 22

THERE WOULD NEVER AGAIN BE an afternoon as long as this one. Or as hot. Or as full oflazy insolent flies. They swarmed on Melanie despite the fan Scarlett kept in constant motion. Herarms ached from swinging the wide palmetto leaf. All her efforts seemed futile, for while shebrushed them from Melanies moist face, they crawled on her clammy feet and legs and made herjerk them weakly and cry: Please! On my feet!

The room was in semigloom, for Scarlett had pulled down the shades to shut out the heat andbrightness. Pin points of sunlight came in through minute holes in the shades and about the edges.

The room was an oven and Scarletts sweat-drenched clothes never dried but became wetter andstickier as the hours went by. Prissy was crouched in a corner, sweating too, and smelled so abominablyScarlett would have sent her from the room had she not feared the girl would take to herheels if once out of sight Melanie lay on the bed on a sheet dark with perspiration and splotchedwith dampness where Scarlett had spilled water. She twisted endlessly, to one side, to the other, toleft, to right and back again.

Sometimes she tried to sit up and fell back and began twisting again. At first, she had tried tokeep from crying out, biting her lips until they were raw, and Scarlett, whose nerves were as raw asthe lips, said huskily: Melly, for Gods sake, dont try to be brave. Yell if you want to. Theresnobody to hear you but us.

As the afternoon wore on, Melanie moaned whether she wanted to be brave or not, andsometimes she screamed. When she did, Scarlett dropped her head into her hands and covered herears and twisted her body and wished that she herself were dead. Anything was preferable to beinga helpless witness to such pain. Anything was better than being tied here waiting for a baby thattook such a long time coming. Waiting, when for all she knew the Yankees were actually at FivePoints.

She fervently wished she had paid more attention to the whispered conversations of matrons onthe subject of childbirth. If only she had! If only she had been more interested in such mattersshed know whether Melanie was taking a long time or not. She had a vague memory of one ofAunt Pittys stories of a friend who was in labor for two days and died without ever having thebaby. Suppose Melanie should go on like this for two days! But Melanie was so delicate. Shecouldnt stand two days of this pain. Shed die soon if the baby didnt hurry. And how could sheever face Ashley, if he were still alive, and tell him that Melanie had diedafter she had promisedto take care of her?

At first, Melanie wanted to hold Scarletts hand when the pain was bad but she clamped downon it so hard she nearly broke the bones. After an hour of this, Scarletts hands were so swollen andbruised she could hardly flex them. She knotted two long towels together and tied them to the footof the bed and put the knotted end in Melanies hands. Melanie hung onto it as though it were a lifeline, straining, pulling it taut, slackening it, tearing it. Throughout the afternoon, her voice went onlike an animal dying in a trap. Occasionally she dropped the towel and rubbed her hands feeblyand looked up at Scarlett with eyes enormous with pain.

Talk to me. Please talk to me, she whispered and Scarlett would gabble something untilMelanie again gripped the knot and again began writhing.

The dim room swam with heat and pain and droning flies, and time went by on such draggingfeet Scarlett could scarcely remember the morning. She felt as if she had been in this steaming,dark, sweating place all her life. She wanted very much to scream every time Melanie did, andonly by biting her lips so hard it infuriated her could she restrain herself and drive off hysteria.

Once Wade came tiptoeing up the stairs and stood outside the door, wailing.

Wade hungwy! Scarlett started to go to him, but Melanie whispered: Dont leave me. Please.

I can stand it when youre here.

So Scarlett sent Prissy down to warm up the breakfast hominy and feed him. For herself, she feltthat she could never eat again after this afternoon.

The clock on the mantel had stopped and she had no way of telling the time but as the heat in theroom lessened and the bright pin points of light grew duller, she pulled the shade aside. She saw toher surprise that it was late afternoon and the sun, a ball of crimson, was far down the sky.

Somehow, she had imagined it would remain broiling hot noon forever.

She wondered passionately what was going on downtown. Had all the troops moved out yet?

Had the Yankees come? Would the Confederates march away without even a fight? Then sheremembered with a sick dropping in her stomach how few Confederates there were and how manymen Sherman had and how well fed they were. Sherman! The name of Satan himself did not frightened her half so much. But there was no time for thinking now, as Melanie called for water,for a cold towel on her head, to be fanned, to have the flies brushed away from her face.

When twilight came on and Prissy, scurrying like a black wraith, lit a lamp, Melanie becameweaker. She began calling for Ashley, over and over, as if in a delirium until the hideous monotonygave Scarlett a fierce desire to smother her voice with a pillow. Perhaps the doctor would comeafter all. If he would only come quickly! Hope raising its head, she turned to Prissy, and orderedher to run quickly to the Meades house and see if he were there or Mrs. Meade.

And if hes not there, ask Mrs. Meade or Cookie what to do. Beg them to come!

Prissy was off with a clatter and Scarlett watched her hurrying down the street, going faster thanshe had ever dreamed the worthless child could move. After a prolonged time she was back, alone.

De doctah ain been home all day. Sont wud he mout go off wid de sojers. Miss Scarlett, Mist

Phils ceased.

Dead?

Yasm, said Prissy, expanding with importance. Talbot, dey coachman, tole me. He wuz shot

Never mind that.

Ah din see Miss Meade. Cookie say Miss Meade she washin him an fixin ter buhy him fo deYankees gits hyah. Cookie say effen de pain get too bad, jes you put a knife unner Miss Mellysbed an it cut de pain in two.

Scarlett wanted to slap her again for this helpful information but Melanie opened wide, dilatedeyes and whispered: Dearare the Yankees coming?

No, said Scarlett stoutly. Prissys a liar.

Yasm, Ah sho is, Prissy agreed fervently.

Theyre coming, whispered Melanie undeceived and buried her face in the pillow. Her voicecame out muffled.

My poor baby. My poor baby. And, after a long interval: Oh, Scarlett, you mustnt stay here.

You must go and take Wade.

What Melanie said was no more than Scarlett had been thinking but hearing it put into wordsinfuriated her, shamed her as if her secret cowardice was written plainly in her face.

Dont be a goose. Im not afraid. You know I wont leave you.

You might as well. Im going to die. And she began moaning again.

Scarlett came down the dark stairs slowly, like an old woman, feeling her way, clinging to thebanisters lest she fall. Her legs were leaden, trembling with fatigue and strain, and she shiveredwith cold from the clammy sweat that soaked her body. Feebly she made her way onto the frontporch and sank down on the top step. She sprawled back against a pillar of the porch and with ashaking hand unbuttoned her basque halfway down her bosom. The night was drenched in warm soft darkness and she lay staring into it, dull as an ox.

It was all over. Melanie was not dead and the small baby boy who made noises like a youngkitten was receiving his first bath at Prissys hands. Melanie was asleep. How could she sleep afterthat nightmare of screaming pain and ignorant midwifery that hurt more than it helped? Whywasnt she dead? Scarlett knew that she herself would have died under such handling. But when itwas over, Melanie had even whispered, so weakly she had to bend over her to hear: Thank you.

And then she had gone to sleep. How could she go to sleep? Scarlett forgot that she too had goneto sleep after Wade was born. She forgot everything. Her mind was a vacuum; the world was avacuum; there had been no life before this endless day and there would be none hereafteronly aheavily hot night, only the sound of her hoarse tired breathing, only the sweat trickling coldly fromarmpit to waist, from hip to knee, clammy, sticky, chilling.

She heard her own breath pass from loud evenness to spasmodic sobbing but her eyes were dryand burning as though there would never be tears in them again. Slowly, laboriously, she heavedherself over and pulled her heavy skirts up to her thighs. She was warm and cold and sticky all atthe same time and the feel of the night air on her limbs was refreshing. She thought dully whatAunt Pitty would say, if she could see her sprawled here on the front porch with her skirts up andher drawers showing, but she did not care. She did not care about anything. Time had stood still. Itmight be just after twilight and it might be midnight. She didnt know or care.

She heard sounds of moving feet upstairs and thought May the Lord damn Prissy, before hereyes closed and something like sleep descended upon her. Then after an indeterminate darkinterval, Prissy was beside her, chattering on in a pleased way.

We done right good, Miss Scarlett. Ah specs Maw couldn a did no better.

From the shadows, Scarlett glared at her, too tired to rail, too tired to upbraid, too tired toenumerate Prissys offensesher boastful assumption of experience she didnt possess, her fright,her blundering awkwardness, her utter inefficiency when the emergency was hot, the misplacing ofthe scissors, the spilling of the basin of water on the bed, the dropping of the new born baby. Andnow she bragged about how good she had been.

And the Yankees wanted to free the negroes! Well, the Yankees were welcome to them.

She lay back against the pillar in silence and Prissy, aware of her mood, tiptoed away into thedarkness of the porch. After a long interval in which her breathing finally quieted and her mindsteadied, Scarlett heard the sound of faint voices from up the road, the tramping of many feetcoming from the north. Soldiers! She sat up slowly, pulling down her skirts, although she knew noone could see her in the darkness. As they came abreast the house, an indeterminate number,passing like shadows, she called to them.

Oh, please!

A shadow disengaged itself from the mass and came to the gate.

Are you going? Are you leaving us?

The shadow seemed to take off a hat and a quiet voice came from the darkness.

Yes, Mam. Thats what were doing. Were the last of the men from the breastworks, bout a mile north from here.

Are youis the army really retreating?

Yes, Mam. You see, the Yankees are coming.

The Yankees are coming! She had forgotten that. Her throat suddenly contracted and she couldsay nothing more. The shadow moved away, merged itself with the other shadows and the feettramped off into the darkness. The Yankees are coming! The Yankees are coming! That was whatthe rhythm of their feet said, that was what her suddenly bumping heart thudded out with each beatThe Yankees are coming!

De Yankees is comin! bawled Prissy, shrinking close to her. Oh, Miss Scarlett, deyll kill usall! Deyll run dey baynits in our stummicks! Deyll

Oh, hush! It was terrifying enough to think these things without hearing them put intotrembling words. Renewed fear swept her. What could she do? How could she escape? Wherecould she turn for help? Every friend had failed her.

Suddenly she thought of Rhett Butler and calm dispelled her fears. Why hadnt she thought ofhim this morning when she had been tearing about like a chicken with its head off? She hated him,but he was strong and smart and he wasnt afraid of the Yankees. And he was still in town. Ofcourse, she was mad at him. But she could overlook such things at a time like this. And he had ahorse and carriage, too. Oh, why hadnt she thought of him before! He could take them all awayfrom this doomed place, away from the Yankees, somewhere, anywhere.

She turned to Prissy and spoke with feverish urgency.

You know where Captain Butler livesat the Atlanta Hotel?

Yasm, but

Well, go there, now, as quick as you can run and tell him I want him. I want him to comequickly and bring his horse and carriage or an ambulance if he can get one. Tell him about thebaby. Tell him I want him to take us out of here. Go, now. Hurry!

She sat upright and gave Prissy a push to speed her feet.

Gawdlmighty, Miss Scarlett! Ahs sceered ter go runnin roun in de dahk by mahseff! Spose deYankees gits me?

If you run fast you can catch up with those soldiers and they wont let the Yankees get you.

Hurry!

Ahs sceered! Sposin Capn Butler ain at de hotel?

Then ask where he is. Havent you any gumption? If he isnt at the hotel, go to the barrooms onDecatur Street and ask for him. Go to Belle Watlings house. Hunt for him. You fool, dont you seethat if you dont hurry and find him the Yankees will surely get us all?

Miss Scarlett, Maw would weah me out wid a cotton stalk, did Ah go in a bahroom or a ho

house.

Scarlett pulled herself to her feet.

Well, Ill wear you out if you dont. You can stand outside in the street and yell for him, cantyou? Or ask somebody if hes inside. Get going.

When Prissy still lingered, shuffling her feet and mouthing, Scarlett gave her another pushwhich nearly sent her headlong down the front steps.

Youll go or Ill sell you down the river. Youll never see your mother again or anybody youknow and Ill sell you for a field hand too. Hurry!

Gawdlmighty, Miss Scarlett

But under the determined pressure of her mistress hand she started down the steps. The frontgate clicked and Scarlett cried: Run, you goose!

She heard the patter of Prissys feet as she broke into a trot, and then the sound died away on thesoft earth.

Chapter 23

AFTER PRISSY HAD GONE, Scarlett went wearily into the downstairs hall and lit a lamp. Thehouse felt steamingly hot, as though it held in its walls all the heat of the noontide. Some of herdullness was passing now and her stomach was clamoring for food. She remembered she had hadnothing to eat since the night before except a spoonful of hominy, and picking up the lamp shewent into the kitchen. The fire in the oven had died but the room was stifling hot. She found half apone of hard corn bread in the skillet and gnawed hungrily on it while she looked about for otherfood. There was some hominy left in the pot and she ate it with a big cooking spoon, not waiting toput it on a plate. It needed salt badly but she was too hungry to hunt for it. After four spoonfuls ofit, the heat of the room was too much and, taking the lamp in one hand and a fragment of pone inthe other, she went out into the hall.

She knew she should go upstairs and sit beside Melanie. If anything went wrong, Melanie wouldbe too weak to call. But the idea of returning to that room where she had spent so many nightmarehours was repulsive to her. Even if Melanie were dying, she couldnt go back up there. She neverwanted to see that room again. She set the lamp on the candle stand by the window and returned tothe front porch. It was so much cooler here, and even the night was drowned in soft warmth. Shesat down on the steps in the circle of faint light thrown by the lamp and continued gnawing on thecorn bread.

When she had finished it, a measure of strength came back to her and with the strength cameagain the pricking of fear. She could hear a humming of noise far down the street, but what itportended she did not know. She could distinguish nothing but a volume of sound that rose andfell. She strained forward trying to hear and soon she found her muscles aching from the tension.

More than anything in the world she yearned to hear the sound of hooves and to see Rhettscareless, self-confident eyes laughing at her fears. Rhett would take them away, somewhere. Shedidnt know where. She didnt care.

As she sat straining her ears toward town, a faint glow appeared above the trees. It puzzled her.

She watched it and saw it grow brighter. The dark sky became pink and then dull red, and suddenly above the trees, she saw a huge tongue of flame leap high to the heavens. She jumped to her feet,her heart beginning again its sickening thudding and bumping.

The Yankees had come! She knew they had come and they were burning the town. The flamesseemed to be off to the east of the center of town. They shot higher and higher and widened rapidlyinto a broad expanse of red before her terrified eyes. A whole block must be burning. A faint hotbreeze that had sprung up bore the smell of smoke to her.

She fled up the stairs to her own room and hung out the window for a better view. The sky was ahideous lurid color and great swirls of black smoke went twisting up to hand in billowy cloudsabove the flames. The smell of smoke was stronger now. Her mind rushed incoherently here andthere, thinking how soon the flames would spread up Peachtree Street and burn this house, howsoon the Yankees would be rushing in upon her, where she would run, what she would do. All thefiends of hell seemed screaming in her ears and her brain swirled with confusion and panic sooverpowering she clung to the window sill for support.

I must think, she told herself over and over. I must think.

But thoughts eluded her, darting in and out of her mind like frightened humming birds. As shestood hanging to the sill, a deafening explosion burst on her ears, louder than any cannon she hadever heard. The sky was rent with gigantic flame. Then other explosions. The earth shook and theglass in the panes above her head shivered and came down around her.

The world became an inferno of noise and flame and trembling earth as one explosion followedanother in ear-splitting succession. Torrents of sparks shot to the sky and descended slowly, lazily,through blood-colored clouds of smoke. She thought she heard a feeble call from the next room butshe paid it no heed. She had no time for Melanie now. No time for anything except a fear thatlicked through her veins as swiftly as the flames she saw. She was a child and mad with fright andshe wanted to bury her head in her mothers lap and shut out this sight. If she were only home!

Home with Mother.

Through the nerve-shivering sounds, she heard another sound, that of fear-sped feet coming upthe stairs three at a time, heard a voice yelping like a lost hound. Prissy broke into the room and,flying to Scarlett, clutched her arm in a grip that seemed to pinch out pieces of flesh.

The Yankees cried Scarlett.

Nom, its our gempmums! yelled Prissy between breaths, digging her nails deeper intoScarletts arm. Deys buhnin de founry an de ahmy supply depots an de wahouses an, fo

Gawd, Miss Scarlett, dey done set off dem sebenty freight cahs of cannon balls an gunpowder an,Jesus, wes all gwine ter buhn up!

She began yelping again shrilly and pinched Scarlett so hard she cried out in pain and fury andshook off her hand.

The Yankees hadnt come yet! There was still time to get away! She rallied her frightened forcestogether.

If I dont get a hold on myself, she thought, Ill be squalling like a scalded cat! and the sightof Prissys abject terror helped steady her. She took her by the shoulders and shook her.

Shut up that racket and talk sense. The Yankees havent come, you fool! Did you see CaptainButler? What did he say? Is he coming?

Prissy ceased her yelling but her teeth chattered.

Yasm, Ah finely foun him. In a bahroom, lak you told me. He

Never mind where you found him. Is he coming? Did you tell him to bring his horse?

Lawd, Miss Scarlett, he say our gempmums done tuck his hawse an cahige fer a amberlance.

Dear God in Heaven!

But he comin

What did he say?

Prissy had recovered her breath and a small measure of control but her eyes still rolled.

Wellm, lak you tole me, Ah foun him in a bahroom. Ah stood outside an yell fer him an hecome out. An ter-reckly he see me an Ah starts tell him, de sojers tech off a sto house downDecatur Street an it flame up an he say Come on an he grab me an we runs ter Fibe Points an hesay den: What now? Talk fas. An Ah say you say, Capn Butler, come quick an bring yo hawsean cahige. Miss Melly done had a chile an you is bustin ter get outer town. An he say: Whereall she studyin bout goin? An Ah say: Ah doan know, suh, but you is boun ter go fo de Yankeesgits hyah an wants him ter go wid you. An he laugh an say dey done tuck his hawse.

Scarletts heart went leaden as the last hope left her. Fool that she was, why hadnt she thoughtthat the retreating army would naturally take every vehicle and animal left in the city? For amoment she was too stunned to hear what Prissy was saying but she pulled herself together to hearthe rest of the story.

An den he say, Tell Miss Scarlett ter res easy. Ahll steal her a hawse outer de ahmy crall effendeys ary one lef. An he say, Ah done stole hawses befo dis night. Tell her Ah git her a hawseeffen Ah gits shot fer it. Den he laugh agin an say, Cut an run home. An befo Ah gits startedKer-bloom! Off goes a noise an Ah lak ter drap in mah tracks an he tell me twarnt nuthin but deammernition our gempmums blowin up sos de Yankees dont git it an

He is coming? Hes going to bring a horse?

So he say.

She drew a long breath of relief. If there was any way of getting a horse, Rhett Butler would getone. A smart man, Rhett. She would forgive him anything if he got them out of this mess. Escape!

And with Rhett she would have no fear. Rhett would protect them. Thank God for Rhett! Withsafety in view she turned practical.

Wake Wade up and dress him and pack some clothes for an of us. Put them in the small trunk.

And dont tell Miss Mellie were going. Not yet. But wrap the baby in a couple of thick towels andbe sure and pack his clothes.

Prissy still dang to her skirts and hardly anything showed in her eyes except the whites. Scarlettgave her a shove and loosened her grip.

Hurry, she cried, and Prissy went off like a rabbit.

Scarlett knew she should go in and quiet Melanies fear, knew Melanie must be frightened out ofher senses by the thunderous noises that continued unabated and the glare that lighted the sky. Itlooked and sounded like the end of the world.

But she could not bring herself to go back into that room just yet. She ran down the stairs withsome idea of packing up Miss Pittypats china and the little silver she had left when she refugeedto Macon. But when she reached the dining room, her hands were shaking so badly she droppedthree plates and shattered them. She ran out onto the porch to listen and back again to the diningroom and dropped the silver clattering to the floor. Everything she touched she dropped. In herhurry she slipped on the rag rug and fell to the floor with a jolt but leaped up so quickly she wasnot even aware of the pain. Upstairs she could hear Prissy galloping about like a wild animal andthe sound maddened her, for she was galloping just as aimlessly.

For the dozenth time, she ran out onto the porch but this time she did not go back to her futilepacking. She sat down. It was just impossible to pack anything. Impossible to do anything but sitwith hammering heart and wait for Rhett. It seemed hours before he came. At last, far up the road,she heard the protesting screech of unoiled axles and the slow uncertain plodding of hooves. Whydidnt he hurry? Why didnt he make the horse trot?

The sounds came nearer and she leaped to her feet and called Rhetts name. Then, she saw himdimly as he climbed down from the seat of a small wagon, heard the clicking of the gate as hecame toward her. He came into view and the light of the lamp showed him plainly. His dress wasas debonair as if he were going to a ball, well-tailored white linen coat and trousers, embroideredgray watered-silk waistcoat and a hint of ruffle on his shirt bosom. His wide Panama hat was setdashingly on one side of his head and in the belt of his trousers were thrust two ivory-handled,long-barreled dueling pistols. The pockets of his coat sagged heavily with ammunition.

He came up the walk with the springy stride of a savage and his fine head was carried like apagan prince. The dangers of the night which had driven Scarlett into panic had affected him likean intoxicant. There was a carefully restrained ferocity in his dark face, a ruthlessness which wouldhave frightened her had she the wits to see it.

His black eyes danced as though amused by the whole affair, as though the earth-splittingsounds and the horrid glare were merely things to frighten children. She swayed toward him as hecame up the steps, her face white, her green eyes burning.

Good evening, he said, in his drawling voice, as he removed his hat with a sweeping gesture.

Fine weather were having. I hear youre going to take a trip.

If you make any jokes, I shall never speak to you again, she said with quivering voice.

Dont tell me you are frightened! He pretended to be surprised and smiled in a way that madeher long to push him backwards down the steep steps.

Yes, I am! Im frightened to death and if you had the sense God gave a goat, youd befrightened too. But we havent got time to talk. We must get out of here.

At your service, Madam. But just where were you figuring on going? I made the trip out here for curiosity, just to see where you were intending to go. You cant go north or east or south orwest The Yankees are all around. Theres just one road out of town which the Yankees havent gotyet and the army is retreating by that road. And that road wont be open long. General Steve Leescavalry is fighting a rear-guard action at Rough and Ready to hold it open long enough for thearmy to get away. If you follow the army down the McDonough road, theyll take the horse awayfrom you and, while its not much of a horse, I did go to a lot of trouble stealing it. Just where areyou going?

She stood shaking, listening to his words, hardly hearing them. But at his question she suddenlyknew where she was going, knew that all this miserable day she had known where she was going.

The only place.

Im going home, she said.

Home? You mean to Tara?

Yes, yes! To Tara! Oh, Rhett, we must hurry!

He looked at her as if she had lost her mind.

Tara? God Almighty, Scarlett! Dont you know they fought all day at Jonesboro? Fought for tenmiles up and down the road from Rough and Ready even into the streets of Jonesboro? TheYankees may be all over Tara by now, all over the County. Nobody knows where they are buttheyre in that neighborhood. You cant go home! You cant go right through the Yankee army!

I will go home! she cried. I will! I will!

You little fool, and his voice was swift and rough. You cant go that way. Even if you didntrun into the Yankees, the woods are full of stragglers and deserters from both armies. And lots ofour troops are still retreating from Jonesboro. Theyd take the horse away from you as quickly asthe Yankees would. Your only chance is to follow the troops down the McDonough road and praythat they wont see you in the dark. You cant go to Tara. Even if you got there, youd probablyfind it burned down. I wont let you go home. Its insanity.

I will go home! she cried and her voice broke and rose to a scream. I will go home! You cantstop me! I will go home! I want my mother! Ill kill you if you try to stop me! I will go home!

Tears of fright and hysteria streamed down her face as she finally gave way under the longstrain. She beat on his chest with her fists and screamed again: I will! I will! If I have to walkevery step of the way!

Suddenly she was in his arms, her wet cheek against the starched ruffle of his shirt, her beatinghands stilled against him. His hands caressed her tumbled hair gently, soothingly, and his voicewas gentle too. So gentle, so quiet, so devoid of mockery, it did not seem Rhett Butlers voice at allbut the voice of some kind strong stranger who smelled of brandy and tobacco and horses,comforting smells because they reminded her of Gerald.

There, there, darling, he said softly. Dont cry. You shall go home, my brave little girl. Youshall go home. Dont cry.

She felt something brush her hair and wondered vaguely through her tumult if it were his lips.

He was so tender, so infinitely soothing, she longed to stay in his arms forever. With such strong arms about her, surely nothing could harm her.

He fumbled in his pocket and produced a handkerchief and wiped her eyes.

Now, blow your nose like a good child, he ordered, a glint of a smile in his eyes, and tell mewhat to do. We must work fast.

She blew her nose obediently, still trembling, but she could not think what to tell him to do.

Seeing how her lip quivered and her eyes looked up at him helplessly, he took command.

Mrs. Wilkes has had her child? It will be dangerous to move herdangerous to drive hertwenty-five miles in that rickety wagon. Wed better leave her with Mrs. Meade.

The Meades arent home. I cant leave her.

Very well. Into the wagon she goes. Where is that simple-minded little wench?

Upstairs packing the trunk.

Trunk? You cant take any trunk in that wagon. Its almost too small to hold all of you and thewheels are ready to come off with no encouragement. Call her and tell her to get the smallestfeather bed in the house and put it in the wagon.

Still Scarlett could not move. He took her arm in a strong grasp and some of the vitality whichanimated him seemed to flow into her body. If only she could be as cool and casual as he was! Hepropelled her into the hall but she still stood helplessly looking at him. His lip went downmockingly: Can this be the heroic young woman who assured me she feared neither God norman?

He suddenly burst into laughter and dropped her arm. Stung, she glared at him, hating him.

Im not afraid, she said.

Yes, you are. In another moment youll be in a swoon and I have no smelling salts about me.

She stamped her foot impotently because she could not think of anything else to doandwithout a word picked up the lamp and started up the stairs. He was close behind her and she couldhear him laughing softly to himself. That sound stiffened her spine. She went into Wades nurseryand found him sitting clutched in Prissys arms, half dressed, hiccoughing quietly. Prissy waswhimpering. The feather tick on Wades bed was small and she ordered Prissy to drag it down thestairs and into the wagon. Prissy put down the child and obeyed. Wade followed her down thestairs, his hiccoughs stilled by his interest in the proceedings.

Come, said Scarlett, turning to Melanies door and Rhett followed her, hat in hand.

Melanie lay quietly with the sheet up to her chin. Her face was deathly white but her eyes,sunken and black circled, were serene. She showed no surprise at the sight of Rhett in her bedroombut seemed to take it as a matter of course. She tried to smile weakly but the smile died before itreached the corners of her mouth.

We are going home, to Tara, Scarlett explained rapidly. The Yankees are coming. Rhett isgoing to take us. Its the only way, Melly.

Melanie tried to nod her head feebly and gestured toward the baby. Scarlett picked up the small baby and wrapped him hastily in a thick towel. Rhett stepped to the bed.

Ill try not to hurt you, he said quietly, tucking the sheet about her. See if you can put yourarms around my neck.

Melanie tried but they fell back weakly. He bent, slipped an arm under her shoulders andanother across her knees and lifted her gently. She did not cry out but Scarlett saw her bite her lipand go even whiter. Scarlett held the lamp high for Rhett to see and started toward the door whenMelanie made a feeble gesture toward the wall.

What is it? Rhett asked softly.

Please, Melanie whispered, trying to point. Charles.

Rhett looked down at her as if he thought her delirious but Scarlett understood and was irritated.

She knew Melanie wanted the daguerreotype of Charles which hung on the wall below his swordand pistol.

Please, Melanie whispered again, the sword.

Oh, all right, said Scarlett and, after she had lighted Rhetts careful way down the steps, shewent back and unhooked the sword and pistol belts. It would be awkward, carrying them as well asthe baby and the lamp. That was just like Melanie, not to be at all bothered over nearly dying andhaving the Yankees at her heels but to worry about Charles things.

As she took down the daguerreotype, she caught a glimpse of Charles face. His large browneyes met hers and she stopped for a moment to look at the picture curiously. This man had been herhusband, had lain beside her for a few nights, had given her a child with eyes as soft and brown ashis. And she could hardly remember him.

The child in her arms waved small fists and mewed softly and she looked down at him. For thefirst time, she realized that this was Ashleys baby and suddenly wished with all the strength left inher that he were her baby, hers and Ashleys.

Prissy came bounding up the stairs and Scarlett handed the child to her. They went hastily down,the lamp throwing uncertain shadows on the wall. In the hall, Scarlett saw a bonnet and put it onhurriedly, tying the ribbons under her chin. It was Melanies black mourning bonnet and it did notfit Scarletts head but she could not recall where she had put her own bonnet.

She went out of the house and down the front steps, carrying the lamp and trying to keep thesaber from banging against her legs. Melanie lay full length in the back of the wagon, and, besideher, were Wade and the towel-swathed baby. Prissy climbed in and took the baby in her arms.

The wagon was very small and the boards about the sides very low. The wheels leaned inward asif their first revolution would make them come off. She took one look at the horse and her heartsank. He was a small emaciated animal and he stood with his head dispiritedly low, almostbetween his forelegs. His back was raw with sores and harness galls and he breathed as no soundhorse should.

Not much of an animal, is it? grinned Rhett. Looks like hell die in the shafts. But hes thebest I could do. Some day Ill tell you with embellishments just where and how I stole him andhow narrowly I missed getting shot. Nothing but my devotion to you would make me, at this stage of my career, turn horse thiefand thief of such a horse. Let me help you in.

He took the lamp from her and set it on the ground. The front seat was only a narrow plankacross the sides of the wagon. Rhett picked Scarlett up bodily and swung her to it. How wonderfulto be a man and as strong as Rhett, she thought, tucking her wide skirts about her. With Rhettbeside her, she did not fear anything, neither the fire nor the noise nor the Yankees.

He climbed onto the seat beside her and picked up the reins.

Oh, wait! she cried. I forgot to lock the front door.

He burst into a roar of laughter and slapped the reins upon the horses back.

What are you laughing at?

At youlocking the Yankees out, he said and the horse started off, slowly, reluctantly. Thelamp on the sidewalk burned on, making a tiny yellow circle of light which grew smaller andsmaller as they moved away.

Rhett turned the horses slow feet westward from Peachtree and the wobbling wagon jouncedinto the rutty lane with a violence that wrenched an abruptly stilled moan from Melanie. Dark treesinterlaced above their heads, dark silent houses loomed up on either side and the white palings offences gleamed faintly like a row of tombstones. The narrow street was a dim tunnel, but faintlythrough the thick leafy ceiling the hideous red glow of the sky penetrated and shadows chased oneanother down the dark way like mad ghosts. The smell of smoke came stronger and stronger, andon the wings of the hot breeze came a pandemonium of sound from the center of town, yells, thedull rumbling of heavy army wagons and the steady tramp of marching feet. As Rhett jerked thehorses head and turned him into another street, another deafening explosion tore the air and amonstrous skyrocket of flame and smoke shot up in the west.

That must be the last of the ammunition trains, Rhett said calmly. Why didnt they get themout this morning, the fools! There was plenty of time. Well, too bad for us. I thought by circlingaround the center of town, we might avoid the fire and that drunken mob on Decatur Street and getthrough to the southwest part of town without any danger. But weve got to cross Marietta Streetsomewhere and that explosion was near Marietta Street or I miss my guess.

Mustmust we go through the fire? Scarlett quavered.

Not if we hurry, said Rhett and, springing from the wagon, he disappeared into the darkness ofa yard. When he returned he had a small limb of a tree in his hand and he laid it mercilessly acrossthe horses galled back. The animal broke into a shambling trot, his breath panting and labored,and the wagon swayed forward with a jolt that threw them about like popcorn in a popper. Thebaby wailed, and Prissy and Wade cried out as they bruised themselves against the sides of thewagon. But from Melanie there was no sound.

As they neared Marietta Street, the trees thinned out and the tall flames roaring up above thebuildings threw street and houses into a glare of light brighter than day, casting monstrous shadowsthat twisted as wildly as torn sails flapping in a gale on a sinking ship.

Scarletts teeth chattered but so great was her terror she was not even aware of it. She was cold and she shivered, even though the heat of the flames was already hot against their faces. This washell and she was in it and, if she could only have conquered her shaking knees, she would haveleaped from the wagon and run screaming back the dark road they had come, back to the refuge ofMiss Pittypats house. She shrank closer to Rhett, took his arm in fingers that trembled and lookedup at him for words, for comfort, for something reassuring. In the unholy crimson glow that bathedthem, his dark profile stood out as clearly as the head on an ancient coin, beautiful, cruel anddecadent. At her touch he turned to her, his eyes gleaming with a light as frightening as the fire. ToScarlett, he seemed as exhilarated and contemptuous as if he got strong pleasure from the situation,as if he welcomed the inferno they were approaching.

Here, he said, laying a hand on one of the long-barreled pistols in his belt. If anyone, black orwhite, comes up on your side of the wagon and tries to lay hand on the horse, shoot him and wellask questions later. But for Gods sake, dont shoot the nag in your excitement.

II have a pistol, she whispered, clutching the weapon in her lap, perfectly certain that ifdeath stared her in the face, she would be too frightened to pull the trigger.

You have? Where did you get it?

Its Charles.

Charles?

Yes, Charlesmy husband.

Did you ever really have a husband, my dear? he whispered and laughed softly.

If he would only be serious! If he would only hurry!

How do you suppose I got my boy? she cried fiercely.

Oh, there are other ways than husbands

Will you hush and hurry?

But he drew rein abruptly, almost at Marietta Street, in the shadow of a warehouse not yettouched by the flames.

Hurry! It was the only word in her mind. Hurry! Hurry!

Soldiers, he said.

The detachment came down Marietta Street, between the burning buildings, walking at routestep, tiredly, rifles held any way, heads down, too weary to hurry, too weary to care if timbers werecrashing to right and left and smoke billowing about them. They were all ragged, so ragged thatbetween officers and men there were no distinguishing insignia except here and there a torn hatbrim pinned up with a wreathed C.S.A. Many were barefooted and here and there a dirtybandage wrapped a head or arm. They went past, looking neither to left nor right, so silent that hadit not been for the steady tramp of feet they might all have been ghosts.

Take a good look at them, came Rhetts gibing voice, so you can tell your grandchildren yousaw the rear guard of the Glorious Cause in retreat.

Suddenly she hated him, hated him with a strength that momentarily overpowered her fear, made it seem petty and small. She knew her safety and that of the others in the back of the wagondepended on him and him alone, but she hated him for his sneering at those ragged ranks. Shethought of Charles who was dead and Ashley who might be dead and all the gay and gallant youngmen who were rotting in shallow graves and she forgot that she, too, had once thought them fools.

She could not speak, but hatred and disgust burned in her eyes as she stared at him fiercely.

As the last of the soldiers were passing, a small figure in the rear rank, his rifle butt dragging theground, wavered, stopped and stared after the others with a dirty face so dulled by fatigue helooked like a sleepwalker. He was as small as Scarlett, so small his rifle was almost as tall as hewas, and his grime-smeared face was unbearded. Sixteen at the most, thought Scarlett irrelevantly,must be one of the Home Guard or a runaway schoolboy.

As she watched, the boys knees buckled slowly and he went down in the dust. Without a word,two men fell out of the last rank and walked back to him. One, a tall spare man with a black beardthat hung to his belt, silently handed his own rifle and that of the boy to the other. Then, stooping,he jerked the boy to his shoulders with an ease that looked like sleight of hand. He started offslowly after the retreating column, his shoulders bowed under the weight, while the boy, weak,infuriated like a child teased by its elders, screamed out: Put me down, damn you! Put me down! Ican walk!

The bearded man said nothing and plodded on out of sight around the bend of the road.

Rhett sat still, the reins lax in his hands, looking after them, a curious moody look on hisswarthy face. Then, there was a crash of falling timbers near by and Scarlett saw a thin tongue offlame lick up over the roof of the warehouse in whose sheltering shadow they sat. Then pennonsand battle flags of flame flared triumphantly to the sky above them. Smoke burnt her nostrils andWade and Prissy began coughing. The baby made soft sneezing sounds.

Oh, name of God, Rhett! Are you crazy? Hurry! Hurry!

Rhett made no reply but brought the tree limb down on the horses back with a cruel force thatmade the animal leap forward. With all the speed the horse could summon, they jolted andbounced across Marietta Street. Ahead of them was a tunnel of fire where buildings were blaringon either side of the short, narrow street that led down to the railroad tracks. They plunged into it.

A glare brighter than a dozen suns dazzled their eyes, scorching heat seared their skins and theroaring, crackling and crashing beat upon their ears in painful waves. For an eternity, it seemed,they were in the midst of flaming torment and then abruptly they were in semidarkness again.

As they dashed down the street and bumped over the railroad tracks, Rhett applied the whipautomatically. His face looked set and absent, as though he had forgotten where he was. His broadshoulders were hunched forward and his chin jutted out as though the thoughts in his mind werenot pleasant. The heat of the fire made sweat stream down his forehead and cheeks but he did notwipe it off.

They pulled into a side street, then another, then turned and twisted from one narrow street toanother until Scarlett completely lost her bearings and the roaring of the flames died behind them.

Still Rhett did not speak. He only laid on the whip with regularity. The red glow in the sky wasfading now and the road became so dark, so frightening, Scarlett would have welcomed words, any words from him, even jeering, insulting words, words that cut. But he did not speak.

Silent or not, she thanked Heaven for the comfort of his presence. It was so good to have a manbeside her, to lean close to him and feel the hard swell of his arm and know that he stood betweenher and unnamable terrors, even though he merely sat there and stared.

Oh, Rhett, she whispered clasping his arm, What would we ever have done without you? Imso glad you arent in the army!

He turned his head and gave her one look, a look that made her drop his arm and shrink back.

There was no mockery in his eyes now. They were naked and there was anger and something likebewilderment in them. His lip curled down and he turned his head away. For a long time theyjounced along in a silence unbroken except for the faint wails of the baby and sniffles from Prissy.

When she was able to bear the sniffling noise no longer, Scarlett turned and pinched her viciously,causing Prissy to scream in good earnest before she relapsed into frightened silence.

Finally Rhett turned the horse at right angles and after a while they were on a wider, smootherroad. The dim shapes of houses grew farther and farther apart and unbroken woods loomed wall-like on either side.

Were out of town now, said Rhett briefly, drawing rein, and on the main road to Rough andReady.

Hurry. Dont stop!

Let the animal breathe a bit. Then turning to her, he asked slowly: Scarlett, are you stilldetermined to do this crazy thing?

Do what?

Do you still want to try to get through to Tara? Its suicidal. Steve Lees cavalry and the YankeeArmy are between you and Tara.

Oh, Dear God! Was he going to refuse to take her home, after all shed gone through this terribleday?

Oh, yes! Yes! Please, Rhett, lets hurry. The horse isnt tired.

Just a minute. You cant go down to Jonesboro on this road. You cant follow the train tracks.

Theyve been fighting up and down mere all day from Rough and Ready on south. Do you knowany other roads, small wagon roads or lanes that dont go through Rough and Ready orJonesboro?

Oh, yes, cried Scarlett in relief. If we can just get near to Rough and Ready, I know a wagontrace that winds off from the main Jonesboro road and wanders around for miles. Pa and I used toride it. It comes out right near the Macintosh place and thats only a mile from Tara.

Good. Maybe you can get past Rough and Ready all right. General Steve Lee was there duringthe afternoon covering the retreat Maybe the Yankees arent there yet. Maybe you can get throughthere, if Steve Lees men dont pick up your horse.

I can get through?

Yes, you. His voice was rough.

But Rhett YouArent going to take us?

No. Im leaving you here.

She looked around wildly, at the livid sky behind them, at the dark trees on either hand hemmingthem in like a prison wall, at the frightened figures in the back of the wagonand finally at him.

Had she gone crazy? Was she not hearing right?

He was grinning now. She could just see his white teeth in the faint light and the old mockerywas back in his eyes.

Leaving us? Wherewhere are you going?

I am going, dear girl, with the army.

She sighed with relief and irritation. Why did he joke at this time of all times? Rhett in thearmy! After all hed said about stupid fools who were enticed into losing their lives by a roll ofdrums and brave words from oratorsfools who killed themselves that wise men might makemoney!

Oh, I could choke you for scaring me so! Lets get on.

Im not joking, my dear. And I am hurt, Scarlett that you do not take my gallant sacrifice withbetter spirit. Where is your patriotism, your love for Our Glorious Cause? Now is your chance totell me to return with my shield or on it. But, talk fast, for I want time to make a brave speechbefore departing for the wars.

His drawling voice gibed in her ears. He was jeering at her and, somehow, she knew he wasjeering at himself too. What was he talking about? Patriotism, shields, brave speeches? It wasntpossible that he meant what he was saying. It just wasnt believable that he could talk so blithely ofleaving her here on this dark road with a woman who might be dying, a new-born infant, a foolishblack wench and a frightened child, leaving her to pilot them through miles of battle fields andstragglers and Yankees and fire and God knows what.

Once, when she was six years old, she had fallen from a tree, flat on her stomach. She could stillrecall that sickening interval before breath came back into her body. Now, as she looked at Rhett,she felt the same way she had felt then, breathless, stunned, nauseated.

Rhett, you are joking!

She grabbed his arm and felt her tears of fright splash down her wrist. He raised her hand andkissed it arily.

Selfish to the end, arent you, my dear? Thinking only of your own precious hide and not of thegallant Confederacy. Think how our troops will be heartened by my eleventh-hour appearance.

There was a malicious tenderness in his voice.

Oh, Rhett, she wailed, how can you do this to me? Why are you leaving me?

Why? he laughed jauntily. Because, perhaps, of the betraying sentimentality that lurks in allof us Southerners. Perhapsperhaps because I am ashamed. Who knows?

Ashamed? You should die of shame. To desert us here, alone, helpless

Dear Scarlett! You arent helpless. Anyone as selfish and determined as you are is neverhelpless. God help the Yankees if they should get you.

He stepped abruptly down from the wagon and, as she watched him, stunned with bewilderment,he came around to her side of the wagon.

Get out, he ordered.

She stared at him. He reached up roughly, caught her under the arms and swung her to theground beside him. With a tight grip on her he dragged her several paces away from the wagon.

She felt the dust and gravel in her slippers hurting her feet. The still hot darkness wrapped her likea dream.

Im not asking you to understand or forgive. I dont give a damn whether you do either, for Ishall never understand or forgive myself for this idiocy. I am annoyed at myself to find that somuch quixoticism still lingers in me. But our fair Southland needs every man. Didnt our braveGovernor Brown say just that? Not matter. Im off to the wars. He laughed suddenly, a ringing,free laugh that startled the echoes in the dark woods.

I could not love thee, Dear, so much, loved I not Honour more. Thats a pat speech, isnt it?

Certainly better than anything I can think up myself, at the present moment. For I do love you,Scarlett, in spite of what I said that night on the porch last month.

His drawl was caressing and his hands slid tip her bare arms, warm strong hands. I love you,Scarlett, because we are so much alike, renegades, both of us, dear, and selfish rascals. Neither ofus cares a rap if the whole world goes to pot so long as we are safe and comfortable.

His voice went on in the darkness and she heard words, but they made no sense to her. Her mindwas tiredly trying to take in the harsh truth that he was leaving her here to face the Yankees alone.

Her mind said: Hes leaving me. Hes leaving me. But no emotion stirred.

Then his arms went around her waist and shoulders and she felt the hard muscles of his thighsagainst her body and the buttons of his coat pressing into her breast A warm tide of feeling,bewildering, frightening, swept over her, carrying out of her mind the time and place and circumstances.

She felt as limp as a rag doll, warm, weak and helpless, and his supporting arms wereso pleasant.

You dont want to change your mind about what I said last month? Theres nothing like dangerand death to give an added fillip. Be patriotic, Scarlett Think how you would be sending a soldierto his death with beautiful memories.

He was kissing her now and his mustache tickled her mouth, kissing her with slow, hot lips thatwere so leisurely as though he had the whole night before him. Charles had never kissed her likethis. Never had the kisses of the Tarleton and Calvert boys made her go hot and cold and shaky likethis. He bent her body backward and his lips traveled down her throat to where the cameo fastenedher basque.

Sweet, he whispered. Sweet.

She saw the wagon dimly in the dark and heard the treble piping of Wades voice.

Muvver! Wade fwightened!

Into her swaying, darkened mind, cold sanity came back with a rush and she remembered whatshe had forgotten for the momentthat she was frightened too, and Rhett was leaving her, leavingher, the damned cad. And on top of it all, he had the consummate gall to stand here in the road andinsult her with his infamous proposals. Rage and hate flowed into her and stiffened her spine andwith one wrench she tore herself loose from his arms.

Oh, you cad! she cried and her mind leaped about, trying to think of worse things to call him,things she had heard Gerald call Mr. Lincoln, the Macintoshes and balky mules, but the wordswould not come. You low-down, cowardly, nasty, stinking thing! And because she could notthink of anything crushing enough, she drew back her arm and slapped him across the mouth withall the force she had left. He took a step backward, his hand going to his face.

Ah, he said quietly and for a moment they stood facing each other in the darkness. Scarlettcould hear his heavy breathing, and her own breath came in gasps as if she had been running hard.

They were right! Everybody was right! You arent a gentleman!

My dear girl, he said, how inadequate.

She knew he was laughing and the thought goaded her.

Go on! Go on now! I want you to hurry. I dont want to ever see you again. I hope a cannonball lands right on you. I hope it blows you to a million pieces. I

Never mind the rest. I follow your general idea. When Im dead on the altar of my country, Ihope your conscience hurts you.

She heard him laugh as he turned away and walked back toward the wagon. She saw him standbeside it, heard him speak and his voice was changed, courteous and respectful as it always waswhen he spoke to Melanie.

Mrs. Wilkes?

Prissys frightened voice made answer from the wagon.

Gawdlmighty. Capn Butler! Miss Melly done fainted away back yonder.

Shes not dead? Is she breathing?

Yassuh, she breathin.

Then shes probably better off as she is. If she were conscious, I doubt if she could live throughall the pain. Take good care of her, Prissy. Heres a shinplaster for you. Try not to be a bigger foolthan you are.

Yassuh. Thankee suh.

Good-by, Scarlett.

She knew he had turned and was facing her but she did not speak. Hate choked all utterance. Hisfeet ground on the pebbles of the road and for a moment she saw his big shoulders looming up inthe dark. Then he was gone. She could hear the sound of his feet for a while and then they diedaway. She came slowly back to the wagon, her knees shaking.

Why had he gone, stepping off into the dark, into the war, into a Cause that was lost, into aworld that was mad? Why had he gone, Rhett who loved the pleasures of women and liquor, thecomfort of good food and soft beds, the feel of fine linen and good leather, who hated the Southand jeered at the fools who fought for it? Now he had set his varnished boots upon a bitter roadwhere hunger tramped with tireless stride and wounds and weariness and heartbreak ran likeyelping wolves. And the end of the road was death. He need not have gone. He was safe, rich,comfortable. But he had gone, leaving her alone in a night as black as blindness, with the YankeeArmy between her and home.

Now she remembered all the bad names she had wanted to call him but it was too late. Sheleaned her head against the bowed neck of the horse and cried.

Chapter 24

THE BRIGHT GLARE of morning sunlight streaming through the trees overhead awakenedScarlett. For a moment, stiffened by the cramped position in which she had slept, she could notremember where she was. The sun blinded her, the hard boards of the wagon under her were harshagainst her body, and a heavy weight lay across her legs. She tried to sit up and discovered that theweight was Wade who lay sleeping with his head pillowed on her knees. Melanies bare feet werealmost in her face and, under the wagon seat, Prissy was curled up like a black cat with the smallbaby wedged in between her and Wade.

Then she remembered everything. She popped up to a sitting position and looked hastily allaround. Thank God, no Yankees in sight! Their hiding place had not been discovered in the night.

It all came back to her now, the nightmare journey after Rhetts footsteps died away, the endlessnight, the black road full of ruts and boulders along which they jolted, the deep gullies on eitherside into which the wagon slipped, the fear-crazed strength with which she and Prissy had pushedthe wheels out of the gullies. She recalled with a shudder how often she had driven the unwillinghorse into fields and woods when she heard soldiers approaching, not knowing if they were friendsor foesrecalled, too, her anguish lest a cough, a sneeze or Wades hiccoughing might betray themto the marching men.

Oh, that dark road where men went by like ghosts, voices stilled, only the muffled tramping offeet on soft dirt, the faint clicking of bridles and the straining creak of leather! And, oh, thatdreadful moment when the sick horse balked and cavalry and light cannon rumbled past in thedarkness, past where they sat breathless, so close she could almost reach out and touch them, soclose she could smell the stale sweat on the soldiers bodies!

When, at last, they had neared Rough and Ready, a few camp fires were gleaming where the lastof Steve Lees rear guard was awaiting orders to fall back. She had circled through a plowed fieldfor a mile until the light of the fires died out behind her. And then she had lost her way in thedarkness and sobbed when she could not find the little wagon path she knew so well. Then finallyhaving found it, the horse sank in the traces and refused to move, refused to rise even when sheand Prissy tugged at the bridle.

So she had unharnessed him and crawled, sodden with fatigue, into the back of the wagon and stretched her aching legs. She had a faint memory of Melanies voice before sleep clamped downher eyelids, a weak voice that apologized even as it begged: Scarlett, can I have some water,please?

She had said: There isnt any, and gone to sleep before the words were out of her mouth.

Now it was morning and the world was still and serene and green and gold with dappledsunshine. And no soldiers in sight anywhere. She was hungry and dry with thirst, aching andcramped and filled with wonder that she, Scarlett OHara, who could never rest well exceptbetween linen sheets and on the softest of feather beds, had slept like a field hand on hard planks.

Blinking in the sunlight, her eyes fell on Melanie and she gasped, horrified. Melanie lay so stilland white Scarlett thought she must be dead. She looked dead. She looked like a dead, old womanwith her ravaged face and her dark hair snarled and tangled across it. Then Scarlett saw with reliefthe faint rise and fall of her shallow breathing and knew that Melanie had survived the night.

Scarlett shaded her eyes with her hand and looked about her. They had evidently spent the nightunder the trees in someones front yard, for a sand and gravel driveway stretched out before her,winding away under an avenue of cedars.

Why, its the Mallory place! she thought, her heart leaping with gladness at the thought offriends and help.

But a stillness as of death hung over the plantation. The shrubs and grass of the lawn were cut topieces where hooves and wheels and feet had torn frantically back and forth until the soil waschurned up. She looked toward the house and instead of the old white clapboard place she knew sowell, she saw there only a long rectangle of blackened granite foundation stones and two tallchimneys rearing smoke-stained bricks into the charred leaves of still trees.

She drew a deep shuddering breath. Would she find Tara like this, level with the ground, silentas the dead?

I mustnt think about that now, she told herself hurriedly. I mustnt let myself think about it.

Ill get scared again if I think about it. But, in spite of herself, her heart quickened and each beatseemed to thunder: Home! Hurry! Home! Hurry!

They must be starting on toward home again. But first they must find some food and water,especially water. She prodded Prissy awake. Prissy rolled her eyes as she looked about her.

Fo Gawd, Miss Scarlett, Ah din spec ter wake up agin cept in de Promise Lan.

Youre a long way from there, said Scarlett, trying to smooth back her untidy hair. Her facewas damp and her body was already wet with sweat. She felt dirty and messy and sticky, almost asif she smelled bad. Her clothes were crushed and wrinkled from sleeping in them and she hadnever felt more acutely tired and sore in all her life. Muscles she did not know she possessed achedfrom her unaccustomed exertions of the night before and every movement brought sharp pain.

She looked down at Melanie and saw that her dark eyes were opened. They were sick eyes,fever bright, and dark baggy circles were beneath them. She opened cracking lips and whisperedappealingly: Water.

Get up, Prissy, ordered Scarlett. Well go to the well and get some water.

But, Miss Scarlett! Dey mout be hants up dar. Sposin somebody daid up dar?

Ill make a hant out of you if you dont get out of this wagon, said Scarlett, who was in nomood for argument, as she climbed lamely down to the ground.

And then she thought of the horse. Name of God! Suppose the horse had died in the night! Hehad seemed ready to die when she unharnessed him. She ran around the wagon and saw him lyingon his side. If he were dead, she would curse God and die too. Somebody in the Bible had donejust that thing. Cursed God and died. She knew just how that person felt. But the horse was alivebreathing heavily, sick eyes half closed, but alive. Well, some water would help him too.

Prissy climbed reluctantly from the wagon with many groans and timorously followed Scarlettup the avenue. Behind the ruins the row of whitewashed slave quarters stood silent and desertedunder the overhanging trees. Between the quarters and the smoked stone foundations, they foundthe well, and the roof of it still stood with the bucket far down the well. Between them, they woundup the rope, and when the bucket of cool sparkling water appeared out of the dark depths, Scarletttilted it to her lips and drank with loud sucking noises, spilling the water all over herself.

She drank until Prissys petulant: Well, Ahs thusty, too, Miss Scarlett, made her recall theneeds of the others.

Untie the knot and take the bucket to the wagon and give them some. And give the rest to thehorse. Dont you think Miss Melanie ought to nurse the baby? Hell starve.

Law, Miss Scarlett, Miss Melly ain got no milkain gwine have none.

How do you know?

Ahs seed too many lak her.

Dont go putting on any airs with me. A precious little you knew about babies yesterday. Hurrynow. Im going to try to find something to eat.

Scarletts search was futile until in the orchard she found a few apples. Soldiers had been therebefore her and there was none on the trees. Those she found on the ground were mostly rotten. Shefilled her skirt with the best of them and came back across the soft earth, collecting small pebblesin her slippers. Why hadnt she thought of putting on stouter shoes last night? Why hadnt shebrought her sun hat? Why hadnt she brought something to eat? Shed acted like a fool. But, ofcourse, shed thought Rhett would take care of them.

Rhett! She spat on the ground, for the very name tasted bad. How she hated him! Howcontemptible he had been! And she had stood there in the road and let him kiss herand almostliked it. She had been crazy last night. How despicable he was!

When she came back, she divided up the apples and threw the rest into the back of the wagon.

The horse was on his feet now but the water did not seem to have refreshed him much. He lookedfar worse in the daylight than he had the night before. His hip bones stood out like an old cows,his ribs showed like a washboard and his back was a mass of sores. She shrank from touching himas she harnessed him. When she slipped the bit into his mouth, she saw that he was practicallytoothless. As old as the hills! While Rhett was stealing a horse, why couldnt he have stolen a goodone?

She mounted the seat and brought down the hickory limb on his back. He wheezed and started,but he walked so slowly as she turned him into the road she knew she could walk faster herselfwith no effort whatever. Oh, if only she didnt have Melanie and Wade and the baby and Prissy tobother with! How swiftly she could walk home! Why, she would run home, run every step of theway that would bring her closer to Tara and to Mother.

They couldnt be more than fifteen miles from home, but at the rate this old nag traveled itwould take all day, for she would have to stop frequently to rest him. All day! She looked down theglaring red road, cut in deep ruts where cannon wheels and ambulances had gone over it. It wouldbe hours before she knew if Tara still stood and if Ellen were there. It would be hours before shefinished her journey under the broiling September sun.

She looked back at Melanie who lay with sick eyes closed against the sun and jerked loose thestrings of her bonnet and tossed it to Prissy.

Put that over her face. Itll keep the sun out of her eyes. Then as the heat beat down upon herunprotected head, she thought: Ill be as freckled as a guinea egg before this day is over.

She had never in her life been out in the sunshine without a hat or veils, never handled reinswithout gloves to protect the white skin of her dimpled hands. Yet here she was exposed to the sunin a broken-down wagon with a broken-down horse, dirty, sweaty, hungry, helpless to do anythingbut plod along at a snails pace through a deserted land. What a few short weeks it had been sinceshe was safe and secure! What a little while since she and everyone else had thought that Atlantacould never fall, that Georgia could never be invaded. But the small cloud which appeared in thenorthwest four months ago had blown up into a mighty storm and men into a screaming tornado,sweeping away her world, whirling her out of her sheltered life, and dropping her down in themidst of this still, haunted desolation.

Was Tara still standing? Or was Tara also gone with the wind which had swept through Georgia?

She laid the whip on the tired horses back and tried to urge him on while the waggling wheelsrocked them drunkenly from side to side.

.

There was death in the air. In the rays of the late afternoon sun, every well-remembered fieldand forest grove was green and still, with an unearthly quiet that struck terror to Scarletts heart.

Every empty, shell-pitted house they had passed that day, every gaunt chimney standing sentinelover smoke-blackened ruins, had frightened her more. They had not seen a living human being oranimal since the night before. Dead men and dead horses, yes, and dead mules, lying by the road,swollen, covered with flies, but nothing alive. No far-off cattle lowed, no birds sang, no windwaved the trees. Only the tired plop-plop of the horses feet and the weak wailing of Melaniesbaby broke the stillness.

The countryside lay as under some dread enchantment Or worse still, thought Scarlett with achill, like the familiar and dear face of a mother, beautiful and quiet at last, after death agonies. Shefelt that the once-familiar woods were full of ghosts. Thousands had died in the fighting nearJonesboro. They were here in these haunted woods where the slanting afternoon sun gleamedeerily through unmoving leaves, friends and foes, peering at her in her rickety wagon, through eyes blinded with blood and red dustglazed, horrible eyes.

Mother! Mother! she whispered. If she could only win to Ellen! If only, by a miracle of God,Tara were still standing and she could drive up the long avenue of trees and go into the house andsee her mothers kind, tender face, could feel once more the soft capable hands that drove out fear,could clutch Ellens skirts and bury her face in them. Mother would know what to do. Shewouldnt let Melanie and her baby die. She would drive away all ghosts and fears with her quietHush, hush. But Mother was ill, perhaps dying.

Scarlett laid the whip across the weary rump of the horse. They must go faster! They had creptalong this never-ending road all the long hot day. Soon it would be night and they would be alonein this desolation that was death. She gripped the reins tighter with hands that were blistered andslapped them fiercely on the horses back, her aching arms burning at the movement.

If she could only reach the kind arms of Tara and Ellen and lay down her burdens, far too heavyfor her young shouldersthe dying woman, the fading baby, her own hungry little boy, thefrightened negro, all looking to her for strength, for guidance, all reading in her straight backcourage she did not possess and strength which had long since failed.

The exhausted horse did not respond to the whip or reins but shambled on, dragging his feet,stumbling on small rocks and swaying as if ready to fall to his knees. But, as twilight came, they atlast entered the final lap of the long journey. They rounded the bend of the wagon path and turnedinto the main road. Tara was only a mile away!

Here loomed up the dark bulk of the mock-orange hedge that marked the beginning of theMacintosh property. A little farther on, Scarlett drew rein in front of the avenue of oaks that ledfrom the road to old Angus Macintoshs house. She peered through the gathering dusk down thetwo lines of ancient trees. All was dark. Not a single light showed in the house or in the quarters.

Straining her eyes in the darkness she dimly discerned a sight which had grown familiar throughthat terrible daytwo tall chimneys, like gigantic tombstones towering above the ruined secondfloor, and broken unlit windows blotching the walls like still, blind eyes.

Hello! she shouted, summoning all her strength. Hello!

Prissy clawed at her in a frenzy of fright and Scarlett, turning, saw that her eyes were rolling inher head.

Doan holler, Miss Scarlett! Please, doan holler agin! she whispered, her voice shaking. Deyain no tellin whut mout answer!

Dear God! thought Scarlett, a shiver running through her. Dear God! Shes right Anythingmight come out of there!

She flapped the reins and urged the horse forward. The sight of the Macintosh house had prickedthe last bubble of hope remaining to her. It was burned, in rums, deserted, as were all theplantations she had passed that day. Tara lay only half a mite away, on the same road, right in thepath of the army. Tara was leveled, too! She would find only the blackened bricks, starlight shiningthrough the roofless walls, Ellen and Gerald gone, the girls gone, Mammy gone, the negroes gone,God knows where, and this hideous stillness over everything.

Why had she come on this fools errand, against all common sense, dragging Melanie and herchild? Better that they had died in Atlanta than, tortured by this day of burning sun and joltingwagon, to die in the silent ruins of Tara.

But Ashley had left Melanie in her care. Take care of her. Oh, that beautiful, heartbreaking daywhen he had kissed her good-by before he went away forever! Youll take care of her, wont you?

Promise! And she had promised. Why had she ever bound herself with such a promise, doublybinding now that Ashley was gone? Even in her exhaustion she hated Melanie, hated the tiny mewingvoice of her child which, fainter and fainter, pierced the stillness. But she had promised andnow they belonged to her, even as Wade and Prissy belonged to her, and she must struggle andfight for them as long as she had strength or breath. She could have left them in Atlanta, dumpedMelanie into the hospital and deserted her. But had she done that, she could never face Ashley,either on this earth or in the hereafter and tell him she had left his wife and child to die amongstrangers.

Oh, Ashley! Where was he tonight while she toiled down this haunted road with his wife andbaby? Was he alive and did he think of her as he lay behind the bars at Rock Island? Or was hedead of smallpox months ago, rotting in some long ditch with hundreds of other Confederates?

Scarletts taut nerves almost cracked as a sudden noise sounded in the underbrush near them.

Prissy screamed loudly, throwing herself to the floor of the wagon, the baby beneath her. Melaniestirred feebly, her hands seeking the baby, and Wade covered his eyes and cowered, too frightenedto cry. Then the bushes beside them crashed apart under heavy hooves and a low moaning bawlassaulted their ears.

Its only a cow, said Scarlett, her voice rough with fright. Dont be a fool, Prissy. Youvemashed the baby and frightened Miss Melly and Wade.

Its a ghos, moaned Prissy, writhing face down on the wagon boards.

Turning deliberately, Scarlett raised the tree limb she had been using as a whip and brought itdown across Prissys back. She was too exhausted and weak from fright to tolerate weakness inanyone else.

Sit up, you fool, she said, before I wear this out on you.

Yelping, Prissy raised her head and peering over the side of the wagon saw it was, indeed, acow, a red and white animal which stood looking at them appealingly with large frightened eyes.

Opening its mouth, it lowed again as if in pain.

Is it hurt? That doesnt sound like an ordinary moo.

Soun ter me lak her bag full an she need milkin bad, said Prissy, regaining some measure ofcontrol. Spec it one of Mist Macintoshs dat de niggers driv in de woods an de Yankees din git.

Well take it with us, Scarlett decided swiftly. Then we can have some milk for the baby.

How all we gwine tek a cow wid us, Miss Scarlett? We kain tek no cow wid us. Cow ain nogood nohow effen she ain been milked lately. Dey bags swells up and busts. Dats why shehollerin.

Since you know so much about it, take off your petticoat and tear it up and tie her to the back of the wagon.

Miss Scarlett, you knows Ah ain had no petticoat fer a month an did Ah have one, Ah wouldn

put it on her fer nuthin. Ah nebber had no truck wid cows. Ahs sceered of cows.

Scarlett laid down the reins and pulled up her skirt. The lace-trimmed petticoat beneath was thelast garment she possessed that was prettyand whole. She untied the waist tape and slipped itdown over her feet, crushing the soft linen folds between her hands. Rhett had brought her thatlinen and lace from Nassau on the last boat he slipped through the blockade and she had worked aweek to make the garment. Resolutely she took it by the hem and jerked, put it in her mouth andgnawed, until finally the material gave with a rip and tore the length. She gnawed furiously, torewith both hands and the petticoat lay in strips in her hands. She knotted the ends with fingers thatbled from blisters and shook from fatigue.

Slip this over her horns, she directed. But Prissy balked.

Ahs sceered of cows, Miss Scarlett. Ah ain nebber had nuthin ter do wid cows. Ah ain noyard nigger. Ahs a house nigger.

Youre a fool nigger, and the worst days work Pa ever did was to buy you, said Scarlettslowly, too tired for anger. And if I ever get the use of my arm again, Ill wear this whip out onyou.

There, she thought, Ive said nigger and Mother wouldnt like that at all.

Prissy rolled her eyes wildly, peeping first at the set face of her mistress and then at the cowwhich bawled plaintively. Scarlett seemed the less dangerous of the two, so Prissy clutched at thesides of the wagon and remained where she was.

Stiffly, Scarlett climbed down from the seat, each movement of agony of aching muscles. Prissywas not the only one who was sceered of cows. Scarlett had always feared them, even themildest cow seemed sinister to her, but this was no time to truckle to small fears when great onescrowded so thick upon her. Fortunately the cow was gentle. In its pain it had sought humancompanionship and help and it made no threatening gesture as she looped one end of the tornpetticoat about its horns. She tied the other end to the back of the wagon, as securely as herawkward fingers would permit. Then, as she started back toward the drivers seat, a vast wearinessassailed her and she swayed dizzily. She clutched the side of the wagon to keep from falling.

Melanie opened her eyes and, seeing Scarlett standing beside her, whispered: Dearare wehome?

Home! Hot tears came to Scarletts eyes at the word. Home. Melanie did not know there was nohome and that they were alone in a mad and desolate world.

Not yet, she said, as gently as the constriction of her throat would permit, but we will be,soon. Ive just found a cow and soon well have some milk for you and the baby.

Poor baby, whispered Melanie, her hand creeping feebly toward the child and falling short.

Climbing back into the wagon required all the strength Scarlett could muster, but at last it wasdone and she picked up the lines. The horse stood with head drooping dejectedly and refused tostart. Scarlett laid on the whip mercilessly. She hoped God would forgive her for hurting a tired animal. If He didnt she was sorry. After all, Tara lay just ahead, and after the next quarter of amile, the horse could drop in the shafts if he liked.

Finally he started slowly, the wagon creaking and the cow lowing mournfully at every step. Thepained animals voice rasped on Scarletts nerves until she was tempted to stop and untie the beast.

What good would the cow do them anyway if there should be no one at Tara? She couldnt milkher and, even if she could, the animal would probably kick anyone who touched her sore udder.

But she had the cow and she might as well keep her. There was little else she had in this worldnow.

Scarletts eyes grew misty when, at last, they reached the bottom of a gentle incline, for just overthe rise lay Tara! Then her heart sank. The decrepit animal would never pull the hill. The slope hadalways seemed so slight, so gradual, in days when she galloped up it on her fleet-footed mare. Itdid not seem possible it could have grown so steep since she saw it last. The horse would nevermake it with the heavy load.

Wearily she dismounted and took the animal by the bridle.

Get out, Prissy, she commanded, and take Wade. Either carry him or make him walk. Lay thebaby by Miss Melanie.

Wade broke into sobs and whimperings from which Scarlett could only distinguish: Darkdark Wade fwightened!

Miss Scarlett, Ah kain walk. Mah feets done blistered an deys thoo mah shoes, an Wade an

me doan weigh so much an

Get out! Get out before I pull you out! And if I do, Im going to leave you right here, in thedark by yourself. Quick, now!

Prissy moaned, peering at the dark trees that closed about them on both sides of the roadtreeswhich might reach out and clutch her if she left the shelter of the wagon. But she laid the babybeside Melanie, scrambled to the ground and, reaching up, lifted Wade out. The little boy sobbed,shrinking close to his nurse.

Make him hush. I cant stand it, said Scarlett, taking the horse by the bridle and pulling him toa reluctant start. Be a little man, Wade, and stop crying or I will come over there and slap you.

Why had God invented children, she thought savagely as she turned her ankle cruelly on thedark roaduseless, crying nuisances they were, always demanding care, always in the way. In herexhaustion, there was no room for compassion for the frightened child, trotting by Prissys side,dragging at her hand and snifflingonly a weariness that she had borne him, only a tired wonderthat she had ever married Charles Hamilton.

Miss Scarlett whispered Prissy, clutching her mistress arm, doan les go ter Tara. Deys notdar. Deys all done gone. Maybe dey daidMaw an allm.

The echo of her own thoughts infuriated her and Scarlett shook off the pinching fingers.

Then give me Wades hand. You can sit right down here and stay.

Nom! Nom!

Then hush!

How slowly the horse moved! The moisture from his slobbering mouth dripped down upon herhand. Through her mind ran a few words of the song she had once sung with Rhettshe could notrecall the rest:

Justafew moredaysforto totethewearyload

Just a few more steps, hummed her brain, over and over, just a few more steps for to tote theweary load.

Then they topped the rise and before them lay the oaks of Tara, a towering dark mass against thedarkening sky. Scarlett looked hastily to see if there was a light anywhere. There was none.

They are gone! said her heart, like cold lead in her breast. Gone!

She turned the horses head into the driveway, and the cedars, meeting over their heads, castthem into midnight blackness. Peering up the long tunnel of darkness, straining her eyes, she sawaheador did she see? Were her tired eyes playing her tricks?the white bricks of Tara blurredand indistinct Home! Home! The dear white walls, the windows with the fluttering curtains, thewide verandaswere they all there ahead of her, in the gloom? Or did the darkness mercifullyconceal such a horror as the Macintosh house?

The avenue seemed miles long and the horse, pulling stubbornly at her hand, plopped slowerand slower. Eagerly her eyes searched the darkness. The roof seemed to be intact Could it becould it be? No, it wasnt possible. War stopped for nothing, not even Tara, built to last fivehundred years. It could not have passed over Tara.

Then the shadowy outline did take form. She pulled the horse forward faster. The white wallsdid show there through the darkness. And untarnished by smoke. Tara had escaped! Home! Shedropped the bridle and ran the last few steps, leaped forward with an urge to clutch the wallsthemselves in her arms. Then she saw a form, shadowy in the dimness, emerging from theblackness of the front veranda and standing at the top of the steps. Tara was not deserted. Someonewas home!

A cry of joy rose to her throat and died there. The house was so dark and still and the figure didnot move or call to her. What was wrong? What was wrong? Tara stood intact, yet shrouded withthe same eerie quiet that hung over the whole stricken countryside. Then the figure moved. Stifflyand slowly, it came down the steps.

Pa? she whispered huskily, doubting almost that it was he. Its meKatie Scarlett. Ive comehome.

Gerald moved toward her, silent as a sleepwalker, his stiff leg dragging. He came close to her,looking at her in a dazed way as if he believed she was part of a dream. Putting out his hand, helaid it on her shoulder. Scarlett felt it tremble, tremble as if he had been awakened from anightmare into a half-sense of reality.

Daughter, he said with an effort Daughter.

Then he was silentWhyhes an old man! thought ScarlettGeralds shoulders sagged. In the face which she could only see dimly, there was none of thevirility, the restless vitality of Gerald, and the eyes that looked into hers had almost the same fear-stunned look that lay in little Wades eyes. He was only a little old man and broken.

And now, fear of unknown things seized her, leaped swiftly out of the darkness at her and shecould only stand and stare at him, all the flood of questioning dammed up at her lips.

From the wagon the faint wailing sounded again and Gerald seemed to rouse himself with aneffortIts Melanie and her baby, whispered Scarlett rapidly. Shes very illI brought her home.

Gerald dropped his hand from her arm and straightened his shoulders. As he moved slowly tothe side of the wagon, there was a ghostly semblance of the old host of Tara welcoming guests, asif Gerald spoke words from out of shadowy memory.

Cousin Melanie!

Melanies voice murmured indistinctly.

Cousin Melanie, this is your home. Twelve Oaks is burned. You must stay with us.

Thoughts of Melanies prolonged suffering spurred Scarlett to action. The present was with heragain, the necessity of laying Melanie and her child on a soft bed and doing those small things forher that could be done.

She must be carried. She cant walk.

There was a scuffle of feet and a dark figure emerged from the cave of the front hall. Pork randown the steps.

Miss Scarlett! Miss Scarlett! he cried.

Scarlett caught him by the arms. Pork, part and parcel of Tara, as dear as the bricks and the coolcorridors! She felt his tears stream down on her hands as he patted her clumsily, crying: Sho isglad you back! Sho is

Prissy burst into tears and incoherent mumblings: Poke! Poke, honey! And little Wade,encouraged by the weakness of his elders, began sniffling: Wade thirsty!

Scarlett caught them all in hand.

Miss Melanie is in the wagon and her baby too. Pork, you must carry her upstairs verycarefully and put her in the back company room. Prissy, take the baby and Wade inside and giveWade a drink of water. Is Mammy here, Pork? Tell her I want her.

Galvanized by the authority in her voice, Pork approached the wagon and fumbled at thebackboard. A moan was wrenched from Melanie as he half-lifted, half-dragged her from thefeather tick on which she had lain so many hours. And then she was in Porks strong arms, herhead drooping like a childs across his shoulder. Prissy, holding the baby and dragging Wade by thehand, followed them up the wide steps and disappeared into the blackness of the hall.

Scarletts bleeding fingers sought her fathers hand urgently.

Did they get well, Pa?

The girls are recovering.

Silence fell and in the silence an idea too monstrous for words took form. She could not, couldnot force it to her lips. She swallowed and swallowed but a sudden dryness seemed to have stuckthe sides of her throat together. Was this the answer to the frightening riddle of Taras silence? As ifanswering the question in her mind Gerald spoke.

Your mother he said and stopped.

AndMother?

Your mother died yesterday.

Her fathers arm held tightly in her own, Scarlett felt her way down the wide dark hall which,even in its blackness, was as familiar as her own mind. She avoided the high-backed chairs, theempty gun rack, the old sideboard with its protruding claw feet, and she felt herself drawn byinstinct to the tiny office at the back of the house where Ellen always sat, keeping her endlessaccounts. Surely, when she entered that room, Mother would again be sitting there before thesecretary and would look up, quill poised, and rise with sweet fragrance and rustling hoops to meether tired daughter. Ellen could not be dead, not even though Pa had said it, said it over and overlike a parrot that knows only one phrase: She died yesterdayshe died yesterdayshe diedyesterday.

Queer that she should feel nothing now, nothing except a weariness that shackled her limbs withheavy iron chains and a hunger that made her knees tremble. She would think of Mother later. Shemust put her mother out of her mind now, else she would stumble stupidly like Gerald or sobmonotonously like Wade.

Pork came down the wide dark steps toward them, hurrying to press close to Scarlett like a coldanimal toward a fire.

Lights? she questioned. Why is the house so dark, Pork? Bring candles.

Dey tuck all de candles, Miss Scarlett, all cept one we been usin ter fine things in de dahkwid, an its bout gone. Mammy been usin a rag in a dish of hawg fat fer a light fer nussin MissCareen an Miss Suellen.

Bring whats left of the candle, she ordered. Bring it into Mothersinto the office.

Pork pattered into the dining room and Scarlett groped her way into the inky small room andsank down on the sofa. Her fathers arm still lay in the crook of hers, helpless, appealing, trusting,as only the hands of the very young and the very old can be.

Hes an old man, an old tired man, she thought again and vaguely wondered why she couldnot care.

Light wavered into the room as Pork entered carrying high a half-burned candle stuck in a saucer. The dark cave came to life, the sagging old sofa on which they sat, the tall secretaryreaching toward the ceiling with Mothers fragile carved chair before it, the racks of pigeonholes,still stuffed with papers written in her fine hand, the worn carpetall, all were the same, exceptthat Ellen was not there, Ellen with the faint scent of lemon verbena sachet and the sweet look inher tip-tilted eyes. Scarlett felt a small pain in her heart as of nerves numbed by a deep wound,struggling to make themselves felt again. She must not let them come to life now; there was all therest of her life ahead of her in which they could ache. But, not now! Please, God, not now!

She looked into Geralds putty-colored face and, for the first time in her life, she saw himunshaven, his once florid face covered with silvery bristles. Pork placed the candle on the candlestand and came to her side. Scarlett felt that if he had been a dog he would have laid his muzzle inher lap and whined for a kind hand upon his head.

Pork, how many darkies are here?

Miss Scarlett, dem trashy niggers done runned away an some of dem went off wid de Yankeesan

How many are left?

Deys me, Miss Scarlett, an Mammy. She been nussin de young Misses all day. An Dilcey,she settin up wid de young Misses now. Us three, Miss Scarlett.

Us three where there had been a hundred. Scarlett with an effort lifted her head on her achingneck. She knew she must keep her voice steady. To her surprise, words came out as coolly andnaturally as if there had never been a war and she could, by waving her hand, call ten houseservants to her.

Pork, Im starving. Is there anything to eat?

Nom. Dey tuck it all.

But the garden?

Dey tuhned dey hawses loose in it.

Even the sweet potato hills?

Something almost like a pleased smile broke his thick lips.

Miss Scarlett, Ah done fergit de yams. Ah specs deys right dar. Dem Yankee folks ain neverseed no yams an dey thinks deys jes roots an

The moon will be up soon. You go out and dig us some and roast them. Theres no corn meal?

No dried peas? No chickens?

Nom. Nom. Whut chickens dey din eat right hyah dey cahied off cross dey saddles.

They They They Was there no end to what They had done? Was it not enough to burnand kill? Must they also leave women and children and helpless negroes to starve in a countrywhich they had desolated?

Miss Scarlett, Ah got some apples Mammy buhied unner de house. We been eatin on demtoday.

Bring them before you dig the potatoes. And, PorkII feel so faint. Is there any wine in thecellar, even blackberry?

Oh, Miss Scarlett, de cellar wuz de fust place dey went.

A swimming nausea compounded of hunger, sleeplessness, exhaustion and stunning blows cameon suddenly and she gripped the carved roses under her hand.

No wine, she said dully, remembering the endless rows of bottles in the cellar. A memorystirred.

Pork, what of the corn whisky Pa buried in the oak barrel under the scuppernong arbor?

Another ghost of a smile lit the black face, a smile of pleasure and respect.

Miss Scarlett, you sho is de beatenes chile! Ah done plum fergit dat bahn. But, Miss Scarlett,dat whisky ain no good. Ain been dar but bout a year an whisky ain no good fer ladies nohow.

How stupid negroes were! They never thought of anything unless they were told. And theYankees wanted to free them.

Itll be good enough for this lady and for Pa. Hurry, Pork, and dig it up and bring us twoglasses and some mint and sugar and Ill mix a julep.

Miss Scarlett, you knows dey ain been no sugar at Tara fer de longes. An dey hawses done etup all de mint an dey done broke all de glasses.

If he says They once more, Ill scream. I cant help it, she thought, and then, aloud: Well,hurry and get the whisky, quickly. Well take it neat. And, as he turned: Wait, Pork. Theres somany things to do that I cant seem to think.  Oh, yes. I brought home a horse and a cow and thecow needs milking, badly, and unharness the horse and water him. Go tell Mammy to look afterthe cow. Tell her shes got to fix the cow up somehow. Miss Melanies baby will die if he doesntget something to eat and

Miss Melly ainkain? Pork paused delicately.

Miss Melanie has no milk. Dear God, but Mother would faint at that!

Well, Miss Scarlett, mah Dilcey ten ter Miss Mellys chile. Mah Dilcey got a new chile herselfan she got mon nuff fer both.

Youve got a new baby, Pork?

Babies, babies, babies. Why did God make so many babies? But no, God didnt make them.

Stupid people made them.

Yasm, big fat black boy. He

Go tell Dilcey to leave the girls. Ill look after them. Tell her to nurse Miss Melanies baby anddo what she can for Miss Melanie. Tell Mammy to look after the cow and put that poor horse in thestable.

Dey ain no stable, Miss Scarlett. Dey use it fer fiah wood.

Dont tell me any more what They did. Tell Dilcey to look after them. And you, Pork, go dig up that whisky and then some potatoes.

But, Miss Scarlett, Ah ain got no light ter dig by.

You can use a stick of firewood, cant you?

Dey ain no fiah woodDey

Do something. ... I dont care what. But dig those things and dig them fast. Now, hurry.

Pork scurried from the room as her voice roughened and Scarlett was left alone with Gerald. Shepatted his leg gently. She noted how shrunken were the thighs that once bulged with saddlemuscles. She must do something to drag him from his apathybut she could not ask aboutMother. That must come later, when she could stand it.

Why didnt they burn Tara?

Gerald stared at her for a moment as if not hearing her and she repeated her question.

Why he fumbled, they used the house as a headquarters.

Yankeesin this house?

A feeling that the beloved walls had been defiled rose in her. This house, sacred because Ellenhad lived in it, and thosethosein it.

So they were, Daughter. We saw the smoke from Twelve Oaks, across the river, before theycame. But Miss Honey and Miss India and some of their darkies had refugeed to Macon, so we didnot worry about them. But we couldnt be going to Macon. The girls were so sickyour motherwe couldnt be going. Our darkies ranIm not knowing where. They stole the wagons and themules. Mammy and Dilcey and Porkthey didnt run. The girlsyour motherwe couldnt bemoving them.

Yes, yes. He mustnt talk about Mother. Anything else. Even that General Sherman himselfhad used this room, Mothers office, for his headquarters. Anything else.

The Yankees were moving on Jonesboro, to cut the railroad. And they came up the road fromthe riverthousands and thousandsand cannon and horsesthousands. I met them on the frontporch.

Oh, gallant little Gerald! thought Scarlett, her heart swelling, Gerald meeting the enemy onthe stairs of Tara as if an army stood behind him instead of in front of him.

They said for me to leave, that they would be burning the place. And I said that they would beburning it over my head. We could not leavethe girlsyour mother were

And then? Must he revert to Ellen always?

I told them there was sickness in the house, the typhoid, and it was death to move them. Theycould burn the roof over us. I did not want to leave anywayleave Tara

His voice trailed off into silence as he looked absently about the walls and Scarlet! understood.

There were too many Irish ancestors crowding behind Geralds shoulders, men who had died onscant acres, fighting to the end rather than leave the homes where they had lived, plowed, loved,begotten sons.

I said that they would be burning the house over the heads of three dying women. But wewould not leave. The young officer waswas a gentleman.

A Yankee a gentleman? Why, Pa!

A gentleman. He galloped away and soon he was back with a captain, a surgeon, and he lookedat the girlsand your mother.

You let a damned Yankee into their room?

He had opium. We had none. He saved your sisters. Suellen was hemorrhaging. He was as kindas he knew how. And when he reported that they wereillthey did not burn the house. Theymoved in, some general, his staff, crowding in. They filled all the rooms except the sick room. Andthe soldiers

He paused again, as if too tired to go on. His stubbly chin sank heavily in loose folds of flesh onhis chest With an effort he spoke again.

They camped all round the house, everywhere, in the cotton, in the corn. The pasture was bluewith them. That night there were a thousand campfires. They tore down the fences and burnedthem to cook with and the barns and the stables and the smokehouse. They killed the cows and thehogs and the chickenseven my turkeys. Geralds precious turkeys. So they were gone. Theytook things, even the picturessome of the furniture, the china

The silver?

Pork and Mammy did something with the silverput it in the wellbut Im not rememberingnow, Geralds voice was fretful. Then they fought the battle from herefrom Tarathere wasso much noise, people galloping up and stamping about. And later the cannon at Jonesboroitsounded like thundereven the girls could hear it, sick as they were, and they kept saying overand over: Papa, make it stop thundering.

Andand Mother? Did she know Yankees were in the house?

Shenever knew anything.

Thank God, said Scarlett. Mother was spared that. Mother never knew, never heard the enemyin the rooms below, never heard the guns at Jonesboro, never learned that the land which was partof her heart was under Yankee feet.

I saw few of them for I stayed upstairs with the girls and your mother. I saw the young surgeonmostly. He was kind, so kind, Scarlett. After hed worked all day with the wounded, he came andsat with them. He even left some medicine. He told me when they moved on that the girls wouldrecover but your mother She was so frail, he saidtoo frail to stand it all. He said she hadundermined her strength.

In the silence that fell. Scarlett saw her mother as she must have been in those last days, a thinpower of strength in Tara, nursing, working, doing without sleep and food that the others mightrest and eat.

And then, they moved on. Then, they moved on.

He was silent for a long time and then fumbled at her hand.

Its glad I am you are home, he said simply.

There was a scraping noise on the back porch. Poor Pork, trained for forty years to clean hisshoes before entering the house, did not forget, even in a time like this. He came in, carefullycarrying two gourds, and the strong smell of dripping spirits entered before him.

Ah spilt a pleny, Miss Scarlett. Its powful hard ter po outer a bung hole inter a gode.

Thats quite all right, Pork, and thank you. She took the wet gourd dipper from him, hernostrils wrinkling in distaste at the reek.

Drink this, Father, she said, pushing the whisky in its strange receptacle into his hand andtaking the second gourd of water from Pork. Gerald raised it, obedient as a child, and gulpednoisily. She handed the water to him but he shook his head.

As she took the whisky from him and held it to her mouth, she saw his eyes follow her, a vaguestirring of disapproval in them.

I know no lady drinks spirits, she said briefly. But today Im no lady, Pa, and there is work todo tonight.

She tilted the dipper, drew a deep breath and drank swiftly. The hot liquid burned down herthroat to her stomach, choking her and bringing tears to her eyes. She drew another breath andraised it again.

Katie Scarlett, said Gerald, the first note of authority she had heard in his voice since herreturn, that is enough. Youre not knowing spirits and they will be making you tipsy.

Tipsy? She laughed an ugly laugh. Tipsy? I hope it makes me drunk. I would like to be drunkand forget all of this.

She drank again, a slow train of warmth lighting in her veins and stealing through her body untileven her finger tips tingled. What a blessed feeling, this kindly fire. It seemed to penetrate even herice-locked heart and strength came coursing back into her body. Seeing Geralds puzzled hurtface, she patted his knee again and managed an imitation of the pert smile he used to love.

How could it make me tipsy, Pa? Im your daughter. Havent I inherited the steadiest head inClayton County?

He almost smiled into her tired face. The whisky was bracing him too. She handed it back tohim.

Now youre going to take another drink and then I am going to take you upstairs and put you tobed.

She caught herself. Why, this was the way she talked to Wadeshe should not address herfather like this. It was disrespectful. But he hung on her words.

Yes, put you to bed, she added lightly, and give you another drinkmaybe all the dipper andmake you go to sleep. You need sleep and Katie Scarlett is here, so you need not worry aboutanything. Drink.

He drank again obediently and, slipping her arm through his, she pulled him to his feet Pork.

Pork took the gourd in one hand and Geralds arm in the other. Scarlett picked up the flaringcandle and the three walked slowly into the dark hall and up the winding steps toward Geraldsroom.

The room where Suellen and Carreen lay mumbling and tossing on the same bed stank vilelywith the smell of the twisted rag burning in a saucer of bacon fat, which provided the only light.

When Scarlett first opened the door the thick atmosphere of the room, with all windows closed andthe air reeking with sick-room odors, medicine smells and stinking grease, almost made her faint.

Doctors might say that fresh air was fatal in a sick room but if she were to sit here, she must haveair or die. She opened the three windows, bringing in the smell of oak leaves and earth, but thefresh air could do little toward dispelling the sickening odors which had accumulated for weeks inthis close room.

Carreen and Suellen, emaciated and white, slept brokenly and awoke to mumble with wide,staring eyes in the tall four-poster bed where they had whispered together in better, happier days.

In the corner of the room was an empty bed, a narrow French Empire bed with curling head andfoot, a bed which Ellen had brought from Savannah. This was where Ellen had lain.

Scarlett sat beside the two girls, staring at them stupidly. The whisky taken on a stomach longempty was playing tricks on her. Sometimes her sisters seemed far away and tiny and theirincoherent voices came to her like the buzz of insects. And again, they loomed large, rushing at herwith lightning speed. She was tired, tired to the bone. She could lie down and sleep for days.

If she could only lie down and sleep and wake to feel Ellen gentry shaking her arm and saying:

It is late, Scarlett. You must not be so lazy. But she could not ever do that again. If there wereonly Ellen, someone older than she, wiser and unweary, to whom she could go! Someone in whoselap she could lay her head, someone on whose shoulders she could rest her burdens!

The door opened softly and Dilcey entered, Melanies baby held to her breast, the gourd ofwhisky in her hand. In the smoky, uncertain light, she seemed thinner than when Scarlett last sawher and the Indian blood evident in her face. The high cheek bones more prominent,thehawk-bridgedno(was) sewas(more) sharperandhercopperskingleamedwithabrighte(were) r hue.

Her faded calico dress was open to the waist and her large bronze breast exposed. Held closeagainst her, Melanies baby pressed his pale rosebud mouth greedily to the dark nipple, sucking,gripping tiny fists against the soft flesh like a kitten in the warm fur of its mothers belly.

Scarlett rose unsteadily and put a hand on Dilceys arm.

It was good of you to stay, Dilcey.

How could I go off wid them trashy niggers, Miss Scarlett, after yo pa been so good to buy meand my little Prissy and yo ma been so kine?

Sit down, Dilcey. The baby can eat all right, then? And how is Miss Melanie?

Nuthin wrong wid this chile cept he hongry, and what it take to feed a hongry chile I got.

Nom, Miss Melanie is all right. She ain gwine die, Miss Scarlett. Doan you fret yoseff. I seen toomany, white and black, lak her. She mighty tired and nervous like and scared fo this baby. But I hesh her and give her some of whut was lef in that gode and she sleepin.

So the corn whisky had been used by the whole family! Scarlett thought hysterically thatperhaps she had better give a drink to little Wade and see if it would stop his hiccoughs AndMelanie would not die. And when Ashley came homeif he did come home ... No, she wouldthink of that later too. So much to think oflater! So many things to unravelto decide. If onlyshe could put off the hour of reckoning forever! She started suddenly as a creaking noise and arhythmic Ker-bunkker-bunk broke the stillness of the air outside.

Thats Mammy gettin the water to sponge off the young Misses. They takes a heap of bathin,

explained Dilcey, propping the gourd on the table between medicine bottles and a glass.

Scarlett laughed suddenly. Her nerves must be shredded if the noise of the well windlass, boundup in her earliest memories, could frighten her. Dilcey looked at her steadily as she laughed, herface immobile in its dignity, but Scarlett felt that Dilcey understood. She sank back in her chair. Ifshe could only be rid of her tight stays, the collar that choked her and the slippers still full of sandand gravel that blistered her feet.

The windlass creaked slowly as the rope wound up, each creak bringing the bucket nearer thetop. Soon Mammy would be with herEllens Mammy, her Mammy. She sat silent, intent onnothing, while the baby, already glutted with milk, whimpered because he had lost the friendlynipple. Dilcey, silent too, guided the childs mouth back, quieting him in her arms as Scarlettlistened to the slow scuffing of Mammys feet across the back yard. How still the night air was!

The slightest sounds roared in her ears.

The upstairs hall seemed to shake as Mammys ponderous weight came toward the door. ThenMammy was in the room, Mammy with shoulders dragged down by two heavy wooden buckets,her kind black face sad with the uncomprehending sadness of a monkeys face.

Her eyes lighted up at the sight of Scarlett, her white teeth gleamed as she set down the buckets,and Scarlett ran to her, laying her head on the broad, sagging breasts which had held so manyheads, black and white. Here was something of stability, thought Scarlett, something of the old lifethat was unchanging. But Mammys first words dispelled this illusion.

Mammys chile is home! Oh, Miss Scarlett, now dat Miss Ellens in de grabe, whut is wegwine ter do? Oh, Miss Scarlett, effen Ah wuz jes daid longside Miss Ellen! Ah kain make outwidout Miss Ellen. Ain nuthin lef now but mizry an trouble. Jes weery loads, honey, jes weeryloads.

As Scarlett lay with her head hugged close to Mammys breast, two words caught her attention,weery loads. Those the words which had hummed in her brain that afternoon so monotonously they hadsicken(were) ed her. Now, she remembered the rest of the song, remembered witha sinking heart:

Justafew moredaysforto totethewearyload!

No matter,twilllneverbelight!

Justafewmoredaystilllwetotterintheroad

No matter, twill never be lightshe took the words to her tired mind. Would her load neverbe light? Was coming home to Tara to mean, not blessed surcease, but only more loads to carry?

She slipped from Mammys arms and, reaching up, patted the wrinkled black face.

Honey, yo hans! Mammy took the small hands with their blisters and blood clots in hers andlooked at them with horrified disapproval. Miss Scarlett, Ah done tole you an tole you dat youkin allus tell a lady by her hans anyo face sunbuhnt too!

Poor Mammy, still the martinet about such unimportant things even though war and death hadjust passed over her head! In another moment she would be saying that young Misses withblistered hands and freckles most generally didnt never catch husbands and Scarlett forestalled theremark.

Mammy, I want you to tell me about Mother. I couldnt bear to hear Pa talk about her.

Tears started from Mammys eyes as she leaned down to pick up the buckets. In silence shecarried them to the bedside and, turning down the sheet, began pulling up the night clothes ofSuellen and Carreen. Scarlett, peering at her sisters in the dim flaring light, saw that Carreen worea nightgown, clean but in tatters, and Suellen lay wrapped in an old negligee, a brown linengarment heavy with tagging ends of Irish lace. Mammy cried silently as she sponged the gauntbodies, using the remnant of an old apron as a cloth.

Miss Scarlett, it wuz dem Slatterys, dem trashy, no-good, low-down po-wite Slatterys dat kiltMiss Ellen. Ah done tole her an tole her it doan do no good doin things fer trashy folks, but MissEllen wuz so sot in her ways an her heart so sof she couldn never say no ter nobody whut neededher.

Slatterys? questioned Scarlett, bewildered. How do they come in?

Dey wuz sick wid disyere thing, Mammy gestured with her rag to the two naked girls,dripping with water on their damp sheet. Ole Miss Slatterys gal, Emmie, come down wid it an

Miss Slattery come hotfootin it up hyah affer Miss Ellen, lak she allus done wen anything wrong.

Why din she nuss her own? Miss Ellen had mon she could tote anyways. But Miss Ellen she wentdown dar an she nuss Emmie. An Miss Ellen wuzn well a-tall her-seff, Miss Scarlett. Yo mahadn been well fer de longes. Dey ain been too much ter eat roun hyah, wid de commissarystealin evey thing us growed. An Miss Ellen eat lak a bird anyways. An Ah tole her an tole herter let dem wite trash alone, but she din pay me no mine. Wellm, bout de time Emmie look lakshe gittin better, Miss Carreen come down wid it. Yasm, de typhoy fly right up de road an ketchMiss Carreen, an den down come Miss Suellen. So Miss Ellen, she tuck an nuss dem too.

Wid all de fightin up de road an de Yankees cross de river an us not knowin whut wuzgwine ter happen ter us an de feel hans runnin off evey night, Ahs bout crazy. But Miss Ellenjes as cool as a cucumber. Cept she wuz worried ter a ghos bout de young Misses kase wecouldn git no medicines nor nuthin. An one night she say ter me affer we done sponge off deyoung Misses bout ten times, she say, Mammy, effen Ah could sell mah soul, Ahd sell it fersome ice ter put on mah gals haids.

She wouldnt let Mist Gerald come in hyah, nor Rosa nor Teena, nobody but me, kase Ah donehad de typhoy.An den it tuck her, Miss Scarlett, anAh seed right off dat twarnt no use.

Mammy straightened up and, raising her apron, dried her streaming eyes.

She went fas, Miss Scarlett, an even dat nice Yankee doctah couldn do nuthin fer her. Shedin know nuthin a-tall. Ah call ter her an talk ter her but she din even know her own Mammy.

Did shedid she ever mention mecall for me?

No, honey. She think she is lil gal back in Savannah, She din call nobody by name.

Dilcey stirred and laid the sleeping baby across her knees.

Yesm, she did. She did call somebody.

You hesh yo mouf, you Injun-nigger! Mammy turned with threatening violence on Dilcey.

Hush, Mammy! Who did she call, Dilcey? Pa?

Nom. Not yo pa. It wuz the night the cotton buhnt

Has the cotton gonetell me quickly!

Yesm, it buhnt up. The sojers rolls it out of the shed into the back yard and hollers, Here thebigges bonfiah in Georgia, and tech it off.

Three years of stored cottonone hundred and fifty thousand dollars, all in one blaze!

And the fiah light up the place lak it wuz daywe wuz scared th

Chapter 25

THE NEXT MORNING Scarletts body was so stiff and sore from the long miles of walking andjolting in the wagon that every movement was agony. Her face was crimson with sunburn and herblistered palms raw. Her tongue was furred and her throat parched as if flames had scorched it andno amount of water could assuage her thirst. Her head felt swollen and she winced even when sheturned her eyes. A queasiness of the stomach reminiscent of the early days of her pregnancy madethe smoking yams on the breakfast table unendurable, even to the smell. Gerald could have toldher she was suffering the normal aftermath of her first experience with hard drinking but Geraldnoticed nothing. He sat at the head of the table, a gray old man with absent, faded eyes fastened onthe door and head cocked slightly to hear the rustle of Ellens petticoats, to smell the lemonverbena sachet.

As Scarlett sat down, he mumbled: We will wait for Mrs. OHara. She is late. She raised anaching head, looked at him with startled incredulity and met the pleading eyes of Mammy, whostood behind Geralds chair. She rose unsteadily, her hand at her throat and looked down at herfather in the morning sunlight. He peered up at her vaguely and she saw that his hands wereshaking, that his head trembled a little.

Until this moment she had not realized how much she had counted on Gerald to take command, to tell her what she must do, and now Why, last night he had seemed almost himself. There hadbeen none of his usual bluster and vitality, but at least he had told a connected story and nownow, he did not even remember Ellen was dead. The combined shock of the coming of the Yankeesand her death had stunned him. She started to speak, but Mammy shook her head vehemently andraising her apron dabbed at her red eyes.

Oh, can Pa have lost his mind? thought Scarlett and her throbbing head felt as if it wouldcrack with this added strain. No, no. Hes just dazed by it all. Ifs like he was sick. Hell get overit. He must get over it. What will I do if he doesnt?I wont think about it now. I wont think ofhim or Mother or any of these awful things now. No, not till I can stand it. There are too manyother things to think aboutthings that can be helped without my thinking of those I cant help.

She left the dining room without eating, and went out onto the back porch where she foundPork, barefooted and in the ragged remains of his best livery, sitting on the steps cracking peanuts.

Her head was hammering and throbbing and the bright sunlight stabbed into her eyes. Merelyholding herself erect required an effort of will power and she talked as briefly as possible,dispensing with the usual forms of courtesy her mother had always taught her to use with negroes.

She began asking questions so brusquely and giving orders so decisively Porks eyebrows wentup in mystification. Miss Ellen didnt never talk so short to nobody, not even when she caughtthem stealing pullets and watermelons. She asked again about the fields, the gardens, the stock,and her green eyes had a hard bright glaze which Pork had never seen in them before.

Yasm, dat hawse daid, lyin dar whar Ah tie him wid his nose in de water bucket he tuhnedover. Nom, de cow ain daid. Din you know? She done have a calf las night Dat why she bellerso.

A fine midwife your Prissy will make, Scarlett remarked caustically. She said she wasbellowing because she needed milking.

Wellm, Prissy ain fixin ter be no cow midwife, Miss Scarlett, Pork said tactfully. An ain

no use quarrelin wid blessins, cause dat calf gwine ter mean a full cow an pleny buttermilk ferde young Misses, lak dat Yankee doctah say dey need.

All right, go on. Any stock left?

Nom. Nuthin cept one ole sow an her litter. Ah driv dem inter de swamp de day de Yankeescome, but de Lawd knows how we gwine git dem. She mean, dat sow.

Well get them all right. You and Prissy can start right now hunting for her.

Pork was amazed and indignant.

Miss Scarlett, dat a feel hans bizness. Ahs allus been a house nigger.

A small fiend with a pair of hot tweezers plucked behind Scarletts eyeballs.

You two will catch the sowor get out of here, like the field hands did.

Tears trembled in Porks hurt eyes. Oh, if only Miss Ellen was here! She understood suchniceties and realized the wide gap between the duties of a field hand and those of a house nigger.

Git out, Miss Scarlett? Whard Ah git out to, Miss Scarlett?

I dont know and I dont care. But anyone at Tara who wont work can go hunt up the Yankees.

You can tell the others that too.

Yasm.

Now, what about the corn and the cotton, Pork?

De cawn? Lawd, Miss Scarlett, dey pasture dey hawses in de cawn an cahied off whut dehawses din eat or spile. An dey driv dey cannons an waggins cross de cotton till it plum ruint,cept a few acres over on de creek bottom dat dey din notice. But dat cotton ain wuth foolin wid,cause ain but bout three bales over dar.

Three bales. Scarlett thought of the scores of bales Tara usually yielded and her head hurt worse.

Three bales. That was little more than the shiftless Slatterys raised. To make matters worse, therewas the question of taxes. The Confederate government took cotton for taxes in lieu of money, butthree bales wouldnt even cover the taxes. Little did it matter though, to her or the Confederacy,now that all the field hands had run away and there was no one to pick the cotton.

Well, I wont think of that either, she told herself. Taxes arent a womans job anyway. Paought to look after such things, but Pa I wont think of Pa now. The Confederacy can whistle forits taxes. What we need now is something to eat.

Pork, have any of you been to Twelve Oaks or the Macintosh place to see if theres, anythingleft in the gardens there?

No, Mam! Us ain lef Tara. De Yankees mout git us.

Ill send Dilcey over to Macintosh. Perhaps shell find something there. And Ill go to TwelveOaks.

Who wid, chile?

By myself. Mammy must stay with the girls and Mr. Gerald cant

Pork set up an outcry which she found infuriating. There might be Yankees or mean niggers atTwelve Oaks. She mustnt go alone.

That will be enough, Pork. Tell Dilcey to start immediately. And you and Prissy go bring in thesow and her litter, she said briefly, turning on her heel.

Mammys old sunbonnet, faded but clean, hung on its peg on the back porch and Scarlett put iton her head, remembering, as from another world, the bonnet with the curling green plume whichRhett had brought her from Paris. She picked up a large split-oak basket and started down the backstairs, each step jouncing her head until her spine seemed to be trying to crash through the top ofher skull.

The road down to the river lay red and scorching between the ruined cotton fields. There wereno trees to cast a shade and the sun beat down through Mammys sunbonnet as if it were made oftarlatan instead of heavy quilted calico, while the dust floating upward sifted into her nose andthroat until she felt the membranes would crack dryly if she spoke. Deep ruts and furrows were cutinto the road where horses had dragged heavy guns along it and the red gullies on either side weredeeply gashed by the wheels. The cotton was mangled and trampled where cavalry and infantry, forced off the narrow road by the artillery, had marched through the green bushes, grinding theminto the earth. Here and mere in the road and fields lay buckles and bits of harness leather, canteensflattened by hooves and caisson wheels, buttons, blue caps, worn socks, bits of bloody rags, all thelitter left by the marching army.

She passed the clump of cedars and the low brick wall which marked the family burying ground,trying not to think of the new grave lying by the three short mounds of her little brothers. Oh, Ellen She trudged on down the dusty hill, passing the heap of ashes and the stumpy chimney wherethe Slattery house had stood, and she wished savagely that the whole tribe of them had been part ofthe ashes. If it hadnt been for the Slatterysif it hadnt been for that nasty Emmie whod had abastard brat by their overseerEllen wouldnt have died.

She moaned as a sharp pebble cut into her blistered foot. What was she doing here? Why wasScarlett OHara, the belle of the County, the sheltered pride of Tara, tramping down this roughroad almost barefoot? Her little feet were made to dance, not to limp, her tiny slippers to peepdaringly from under bright silks, not to collect sharp pebbles and dust. She was born to bepampered and waited upon, and here she was, sick and ragged, driven by hunger to hunt for foodin the gardens of her neighbors.

At the bottom of the long hill was the river and how cool and still were the tangled treesoverhanging the water! She sank down on the low bank, and stripping off the remnants of herslippers and stockings, dabbled her burning feet in the cool water. It would be so good to sit hereall day, away from the helpless eyes of Tara, here where only the rustle of leaves and the gurgle ofslow water broke the stillness. But reluctantly she replaced her shoes and stockings and trudgeddown the bank, spongy with moss, under the shady trees. The Yankees had burned the bridge butshe knew of a footlog bridge across a narrow point of the stream a hundred yards below. Shecrossed it cautiously and trudged uphill the hot half-mile to Twelve Oaks.

There towered the twelve oaks, as they had stood since Indian days, but with their leaves brownfrom fire and the branches burned and scorched. Within their circle lay the ruins of John Wilkes

house, the charred remains of that once stately home which had crowned the hill in white-columned dignity. The deep pit which had been the cellar, the blackened field-stone foundationsand two mighty chimneys marked the site. One long column, half-burned, had fallen across thelawn, crushing the cape jessamine bushes.

Scarlett sat down on the column, too sick at the sight to go on. This desolation went to her heartas nothing she had ever experienced. Here was the Wilkes pride in the dust at her feet. Here wasthe end of the kindly, courteous house which had always welcomed her, the house where in futiledreams she had aspired to be mistress. Here she had danced and dined and flirted and here she hadwatched with a jealous, hurting heart how Melanie smiled up at Ashley. Here, too, in the coolshadows of the trees, Charles Hamilton had rapturously pressed her hand when she said she wouldmarry him.

Oh, Ashley, she thought, I hope you are dead! I could never bear for you to see this.

Ashley had married his bride here but his son and his sons son would never bring brides to thishouse. There would be no more matings and births beneath this roof which she had so loved andlonged to rule. The house was dead and to Scarlett, it was as if all the Wilkeses, too, were dead in its ashes.

I wont think of it now. I cant stand it now. Ill think of it later, she said aloud, turning hereyes away.

Seeking the garden, she limped around the ruins, by the trampled rose beds the Wilkes girls hadtended so zealously, across the back yard and through the ashes to the smokehouse, barns andchicken houses. The split-rail fence around the kitchen garden had been demolished and the onceorderly rows of green plants had suffered the same treatment as those at Tara. The soft earth wasscarred with hoof prints and heavy wheels and the vegetables were mashed into the soil. There wasnothing for her here.

She walked back across the yard and took the path down toward the silent row of whitewashedcabins in the quarters, calling Hello! as she went. But no voice answered her. Not even a dogbarked. Evidently the Wilkes negroes had taken flight or followed the Yankees. She knew everyslave had his own garden patch and as she reached the quarters, she hoped these little patches hadbeen spared.

Her search was rewarded but she was too tired even to feel pleasure at the sight of turnips andcabbages, wilted for want of water but still standing, and straggling butter beans and snap beans,yellow but edible. She sat down in the furrows and dug into the earth with hands that shook, fillingher basket slowly. There would be a good meal at Tara tonight, in spite of the lack of side meat toboil with the vegetables. Perhaps some of the bacon grease Dilcey was using for illumination couldbe used for seasoning. She must remember to tell Dilcey to use pine knots and save the grease forcooking.

Close to the back step of one cabin, she found a short row of radishes and hunger assaulted hersuddenly. A spicy, sharp-tasting radish was exactly what her stomach craved. Hardly waiting to rubthe dirt off on her skirt, she bit off half and swallowed it hastily. It was old and coarse and sopeppery that tears started in her eyes. No sooner had the lump gone down than her empty outragedstomach revolted and she lay in the soft dirt and vomited tiredly.

The faint niggery smell which crept from the cabin increased her nausea and, without strength tocombat it, she kept on retching miserably while the cabins and trees revolved swiftly around her.

After a long time, she lay weakly on her face, the earth as soft and comfortable as a featherpillow, and her mind wandered feebly here and there. She, Scarlett OHara. was lying behind anegro cabin, in the midst of ruins, too sick and too weak to move, and no one in the world knew orcared. No one would care if they did know, for everyone had too many troubles of his own toworry about her. And all this was happening to her, Scarlett OHara, who had never raised her handeven to pick up her discarded stockings from the floor or to tie the laces of her slippersScarlett,whose little headaches and tempers had been coddled and catered to all her life.

As she lay prostrate, too weak to fight off memories and worries, they rushed at her likebuzzards waiting for death. No longer had she the strength to say: Ill think of Mother and Pa andAshley and all this ruin later Yes, later when I can stand it. She could not stand it now, but shewas thinking of them whether she willed it or not. The thoughts circled and swooped above her,dived down and drove tearing claws and sharp beaks into her mind. For a timeless time, she lay still, her face in the dirt, the sun beating hotly upon her, remembering things and people who weredead, remembering a way of living that was gone foreverand looking upon the harsh vista of thedark future.

When she arose at last and saw again the black ruins of Twelve Oaks, her head was raised highand something that was youth and beauty and potential tenderness had gone out of her face forever.

What was past was past. Those who were dead were dead. The lazy luxury of the old days wasgone, never to return. And, as Scarlett settled the heavy basket across her arm, she had settled herown mind and her own life.

There was no going back and she was going forward.

Throughout the South for fifty years there would be bitter-eyed women who looked backward,to dead times, to dead men, evoking memories that hurt and were futile, bearing poverty with bitterpride because they had those memories. But Scarlett was never to look back.

She gazed at the blackened stones and, for the last time, she saw Twelve Oaks rise before hereyes as it had once stood, rich and proud, symbol of a race and a way of living. Then she starteddown the road toward Tara, the heavy basket cutting into her flesh.

Hunger gnawed at her empty stomach again and she said aloud: As God is my witness, as Godis my witness, the Yankees arent going to lick me. Im going to live through this, and when itsover, Im never going to be hungry again. No, nor any of my folks. If I have to steal or kill asGod is my witness, Im never going to be hungry again.

In the days that followed, Tara might have been Crusoes desert island, so still it was, so isolatedfrom the rest of the world. The world lay only a few miles away, but a thousand miles of tumblingwaves might have stretched between Tara and Jonesboro and Fayetteville and Lovejoy, evenbetween Tara and the neighbors plantations. With the old horse dead, their one mode of conveyancewas gone, and there was neither time nor strength for walking the weary red miles.

Sometimes, in the days of backbreaking work, in the desperate struggle for food and the never-ceasing care of the three sick girls, Scarlett found herself straining her ears for familiar soundsthe shrill laughter of the pickaninnies in the quarters, the creaking of wagons home from the fields,the thunder of Geralds stallion tearing across the pasture, the crunching of carriage wheels on thedrive and the gay voices of neighbors dropping in for an afternoon of gossip. But she listened invain. The road lay still and deserted and never a cloud of red dust proclaimed the approach ofvisitors. Tara was an island in a sea of rolling green hills and red fields.

Somewhere the world and families who ate and slept safely under their own roofs. Somewheregirlsin(was) thrice-turned dresses were flirting gaily and singing When This Cruel War IsOver, as she had done, only a few weeks before. Somewhere there was a war and cannonbooming and burning towns and men who rotted in hospitals amid sickening-sweet stinks.

Somewhere a barefoot army in dirty homespun was marching, fighting, sleeping, hungry andweary with the weariness that comes when hope is gone. And somewhere the hills of Georgia wereblue with Yankees, well-fed Yankees on sleek corn-stuffed horses.

Beyond Tara was the war and the world. But on the plantation the war and the world did not exist except as memories which must be fought back when they rushed to mind in moments ofexhaustion. The world outside receded before the demands of empty and half-empty stomachs andlife resolved itself into two related thoughts, food and how to get it.

Food! Food! Why did the stomach have a longer memory man the mind? Scarlett could banishheartbreak but not hunger and each morning as she lay half asleep, before memory brought back toher mind war and hunger, she curled drowsily expecting the sweet smells of bacon frying and rollsbaking. And each morning she sniffed so hard to really smell the food she woke herself up.

There were apples, yams, peanuts and milk on the table at Tara but never enough of even thisprimitive fare. At the sight of them, three times a day, her memory would rush back to the old days,the meals of the old days, the candle-lit table and the food perfuming the air.

How careless they had been of food then, what prodigal waste! Rolls, corn muffins, biscuits andwaffles, dripping butter, all at one meal. Ham at one end of the table and fried chicken at the other,collards swimming richly in pot liquor iridescent with grease, snap beans in mountains on brightlyflowered porcelain, fried squash, stewed okra, carrots in cream sauce thick enough to cut. Andthree desserts, so everyone might have his choice, chocolate layer cake, vanilla blanc mange andpound cake topped with sweet whipped cream. The memory of those savory meals had the powerto bring tears to her eyes as death and war had failed to do, and the power to turn her ever-gnawingstomach from rumbling emptiness to nausea. For the appetite Mammy had always deplored, thehealthy appetite of a nineteen-year-old girl, now was increased fourfold by the hard andunremitting labor she had never known before.

Hers was not the only troublesome appetite at Tara, for wherever she turned hungry faces, blackand white, met her eyes. Soon Carreen and Suellen would have the insatiable hunger of typhoidconvalescents. Already little Wade whined monotonously: Wade doan like yams. Wade hungwy.

The others grumbled, too:

Miss Scarlett, ness I gits mo to eat, I kain nuss neither of these chillun.

Miss Scarlett, ef Ah doan have mo in mah stummick, Ah kain split no wood.

Lamb, Ahs perishra fer real vittles.

Daughter, must we always have yams?

Only Melanie did not complain, Melanie whose face grew thinner and whiter and twitched withpain even in her sleep.

Im not hungry, Scarlett. Give my share of the milk to Dilcey. She needs it to nurse the babies.

Sick people are never hungry.

It was her gentle hardihood which irritated Scarlett more than the nagging whining voices of theothers. She couldand didshout them down with bitter sarcasm but before Melaniesunselfishness she was helpless, helpless and resentful. Gerald, the negroes and Wade clung toMelanie now, because even in her weakness she was kind and sympathetic, and these days Scarlettwas neither.

Wade especially haunted Melanies room. There was something wrong with Wade, but just whatit was Scarlett had no time to discover. She took Mammys word that the little boy had worms and dosed him with the mixture of dried herbs and bark which Ellen always used to worm thepickaninnies. But the vermifuge only made the child look paler. These days Scarlett hardly thoughtof Wade as a person. He was only another worry, another mouth to feed. Some day when thepresent emergency was over, she would play with him, tell him stories and teach him his ABCs butnow she did not have the time or the soul or the inclination. And, because he always seemedunderfoot when she was most weary and worried, she often spoke sharply to him.

It annoyed her that her quick reprimands brought such acute fright to his round eyes, for helooked so simple minded when he was frightened. She did not realize that the little boy livedshoulder to shoulder with terror too great for an adult to comprehend. Fear lived with Wade, fearthat shook his soul and made him wake screaming in the night. Any unexpected noise or sharpword set him to trembling, for in his mind noises and harsh words were inextricably mixed withYankees and he was more afraid of Yankees than of Prissys hants.

Until the thunders of the siege began, he had never known anything but a happy, placid, quietlife. Even though his mother paid him little attention, he had known nothing but petting and kindwords until the night when he was jerked from slumber to find the sky aflame and the airdeafening with explosions. In that night and the day which followed, he had been slapped by hismother for the first time and had heard her voice raised at him in harsh words. Life in the pleasantbrick house on Peachtree Street, the only life he knew, had vanished that night and he would neverrecover from its loss. In the flight from Atlanta, he had understood nothing except that the Yankeeswere after him and now he still lived in fear that the Yankees would catch him and cut him topieces. Whenever Scarlett raised her voice in reproof, he went weak with fright as his vaguechildish memory brought up the horrors of the first time she had ever done it. Now, Yankees and across voice were linked forever in his mind and he was afraid of his mother.

Scarlett could not help noticing that the child was beginning to avoid her and, in the raremoments when her unending duties gave her time to think about it, it bothered her a great deal. Itwas even worse than having him at her skirts all the time and she was offended that his refuge wasMelanies bed where he played quietly at games Melanie suggested or listened to stories she told.

Wade adored Auntee who had a gentle voice, who always smiled and who never said: Hush,Wade! You give me a headache or Stop fidgeting, Wade, for Heavens sake!

Scarlett had neither the time nor the impulse to pet him but it made her jealous to see Melanie doit. When she found him one day standing on his head in Melanies bed and saw him collapse onher, she slapped him.

Dont you know better than to jiggle Auntee like that when shes sick? Now, trot right out inthe yard and play, and dont come in here again.

But Melanie reached out a weak arm and drew the wailing child to her.

There, there, Wade. You didnt mean to jiggle me, did you? He doesnt bother me, Scarlett. Dolet him stay with me. Let me take care of him. Its the only thing I can do till I get well, and youvegot your hands full enough without having to watch him.

Dont be a goose, Melly, said Scarlett shortly. You arent getting well like you should andhaving Wade fall on your stomach wont help you. Now, Wade, if I ever catch you on Auntees bed again, Ill wear you out. And stop sniffling. You are always sniffling. Try to be a little man.

Wade flew sobbing to hide himself under the house. Melanie bit her lip and tears came to hereyes, and Mammy standing in the hall, a witness to the scene, scowled and breathed hard. But noone talked back to Scarlett these days. They were all afraid of her sharp tongue, all afraid of thenew person who walked in her body.

Scarlett reigned supreme at Tara now and, like others suddenly elevated to authority, all theBullying instincts in her nature rose to the surface. It was not that she was basically unkind. It wasbecause she was so frightened and unsure of herself she was harsh lest others learn her inadequacies:

and refuse her authority. Besides, there was some pleasure in shouting at people andknowing they were afraid. Scarlett found that it relieved her overwrought nerves. She was notblind to the fact that her personality was changing. Sometimes when her curt orders made Porkstick out his under lip and Mammy mutter: Some folks rides mighty high dese days, shewondered where her good manners had gone. All the courtesy, all the gentleness Ellen had strivento instill in her had fallen away from her as quickly as leaves fall from trees in the first chill windof autumn.

Time and again, Ellen had said: Be firm but be gentle with inferiors, especially darkies. But ifshe was gentle the darkies would sit in the kitchen all day, talking endlessly about the good olddays when a house nigger wasnt supposed to do a field hands work.

Love and cherish your sisters. Be kind to the afflicted, said Ellen. Show tenderness to thosein sorrow and in trouble.

She couldnt love her sisters now. They were simply a dead weight on her shoulders. And as forcherishing them, wasnt she bathing them, combing their hair and-feeding them, even at theexpense of walking miles every day to find vegetables? Wasnt she learning to milk the cow, eventhough her heart was always in her throat when that fearsome animal shook its horns at her? Andas for being kind, that was a waste of time. If she was overly kind to them, theyd probablyprolong their stay in bed, and she wanted them on their feet again as soon as possible, so therewould be four more hands to help her.

They were convalescing slowly and lay scrawny and weak in their bed. While they had beenunconscious, the world had changed. The Yankees had come, the darkies had gone and Mother haddied. Here were three unbelievable happenings and their minds could not take them in. Sometimesthey believed they must still be delirious and these things had not happened at all. CertainlyScarlett was so changed she couldnt be real. When she hung over the foot of their bed andoutlined the work she expected them to do when they recovered, they looked at her as if she were ahobgoblin. It was beyond their comprehension that they no longer had a hundred slaves to do thework. It was beyond their comprehension that an OHara lady should do manual labor.

But, Sister, said Carreen, her sweet childish face blank with consternation. I couldnt splitkindling! It would ruin my hands!

Look at mine, answered Scarlett with a frightening smile as she pushed blistered andcalloused palms toward her.

I think you are hateful to talk to Baby and me like this! cried Suellen. I think you are lying and trying to frighten us. If Mother were only here, she wouldnt let you talk to us like this! Splitkindling, indeed!

Suellen looked with weak loathing at her older sister, feeling sure Scarlett said these things justto be mean. Suellen had nearly died and she had lost her mother and she was lonely and scared andshe wanted to be petted and made much of. Instead, Scarlett looked over the foot of the bed eachday, appraising their improvement with a hateful new gleam in her slanting green eyes and talkedabout making beds, preparing food, carrying water buckets and splitting kindling. And she lookedas if she took a pleasure in saying such awful things.

Scarlett did take pleasure in it. She bullied the negroes and harrowed the feelings of her sistersnot only because she was too worried and strained and tired to do otherwise but because it helpedher to forget her own bitterness that everything her mother had told her about life was wrong.

Nothing her mother had taught her was of any value whatsoever now and Scarletts heart wassore and puzzled. It did not occur to her that Ellen could not have foreseen the collapse of thecivilization in which she raised her daughters, could not have anticipated the disappearings of theplaces in society for which she trained them so well. It did not occur to her that Ellen had lookeddown a vista of placid future years, all like the uneventful years of her own life, when she hadtaught her to be gentle and gracious, honorable and kind, modest and truthful. Life treated womenwell when they had learned those lessons, said Ellen.

Scarlett thought in despair: Nothing, no, nothing, she taught me is of any help to me! Whatgood will kindness do me now? What value is gentleness? Better that Id learned to plow or chopcotton like a darky. Oh, Mother, you were wrong!

She did not stop to think that Ellens ordered world was gone and a brutal world had taken itsplace, a world wherein every standard, every value had changed. She only saw, or thought she saw,that her mother had been wrong, and she changed swiftly to meet this new world for which shewas not prepared.

Only her feeling for Tara had not changed. She never came wearily home across the fields andsaw the sprawling white house that her heart did not swell with love and the joy of homecoming.

She never looked out of her window at green pastures and red fields and tall tangled swamp forestthat a sense of beauty did not fill her. Her love for this land with its softly rolling hills of bright-redsoil, this beautiful red earth that was blood colored, garnet, brick dust, vermilion, which somiraculously grew green bushes starred with white puffs, was one part of Scarlett which did notchange when all else was changing. Nowhere else in the world was there land like this.

When she looked at Tara she could understand, in part, why wars were fought. Rhett was wrongwhen he said men fought wars for money. No, they fought for swelling acres, softly furrowed bythe plow, for pastures green with stubby cropped grass, for lazy yellow rivers and white housesthat were cool amid magnolias. These were the only things worth fighting for, the red earth whichwas theirs and would be their sons, the red earth which would bear cotton for their sons and theirsons sons.

The trampled acres of Tara were all that was left to her, now that Mother and Ashley were gone,now that Gerald was senile from shock, and money and darkies and security and position had vanished overnight. As from another world she remembered a conversation with her father aboutthe land and wondered how she could have been so young, so ignorant, as not to understand whathe meant when he said that the land was the one thing in the world worth fighting for.

For tis the only thing in the world that lasts  and to anyone with a drop of Irish blood inthem the land they live on is like their mother.  Tis the only thing worth working for, fightingfor, dying for.

Yes, Tara was worth fighting for, and she accepted simply and without question the fight. Noone was going to get Tara away from her. No one was going to set her and her people adrift on thecharity of relatives. She would hold Tara, if she had to break the back of every person on it.

Chapter 26

SCARLETT HAD BEEN AT TARA two weeks since her return from Atlanta when the largestblister on her foot began to fester, swelling until it was impossible for her to put on her shoe or domore than hobble about on her heel. Desperation plucked at her when she looked at the angry soreon her toe. Suppose it should gangrene like the soldiers wounds and she should die, far away froma doctor? Bitter as life was now, she had no desire to leave it. And who would look after Tara if sheshould die?

She had hoped when she first came home that Geralds old spirit would revive and he wouldtake command, but in these two weeks that hope had vanished. She knew now that, whether sheliked it or not, she had the plantation and all its people on her two inexperienced hands, for Geraldstill sat quietly, like a man in a dream, so frighteningly absent from Tara, so gentle. To her pleas foradvice he gave as his only answer: Do what you think best, Daughter. Or worse still, Consultwith your mother, Puss.

He never would be any different and now Scarlett realized the truth and accepted it withoutemotionthat until he died Gerald would always be waiting for Ellen, always listening for her. Hewas in some dim borderline country where time was standing still and Ellen was always in the nextroom. The mainspring of his existence was taken away when she died and with it had gone hisbounding assurance, his impudence and his restless vitality. Ellen was the audience before whichthe blustering drama of Gerald OHara had been played. Now the curtain had been rung downforever, the footlights dimmed and the audience suddenly vanished, while the stunned old actorremained on his empty stage, waiting for his cues.

That morning the house was still, for everyone except Scarlett, Wade and the three sick girls wasin the swamp hunting the sow. Even Gerald had aroused a little and stumped off across thefurrowed fields, one hand on Porks arm and a coil of rope in the other. Suellen and Careen hadcried themselves to sleep, as they did at least twice a day when they thought of Ellen, tears of griefand weakness oozing down their sunken cheeks. Melanie, who had been propped up on pillows forthe first time that day, lay covered with a mended sheet between two babies, the downy flaxenhead of one cuddled in her arm, the kinky black head of Dilceys child held as gently in the other.

Wade sat at the bottom of the bed, listening to a fairy story.

To Scarlett, the stillness at Tara was unbearable, for it reminded her too sharply of the deathlike stillness of the desolate country through which she had passed that long day on her way home fromAtlanta. The cow and the calf had made no sound for hours. There were no birds twittering outsideher window and even the noisy family of mockers who had lived among the harshly rustling leavesof the magnolia for generations had no song that day. She had drawn a low chair close to the openwindow of her bedroom, looking out on the front drive, the lawn and the empty green pastureacross the road, and she sat with her skirts well above her knees and her chin resting on her armson the window sill. There was a bucket of well water on the floor beside her and every now andthen she lowered her blistered foot into it, screwing up her face at the stinging sensation.

Fretting, she dug her chin into her arm. Just when she needed her strength most, this toe had tofester. Those fools would never catch the sow. It had taken them a week to capture the pigs, one byone, and now after two weeks the sow was still at liberty. Scarlett knew that if she were just therein the swamp with them, she could tuck up her dress to her knees and take the rope and lasso thesow before you could say Jack Robinson.

But even after the sow was caughtif she were caught? What then, after she and her litter wereeaten? Life would go on and so would appetites. Winter was coming and there would be no food,not even the poor remnants of the vegetables from the neighbors gardens. They must have driedpeas and sorghum and meal and rice andandoh, so many things. Corn and cotton seed for nextsprings planting, and new clothes too. Where was it all to come from and how would she pay forit?

She had privately gone through Geralds pockets and his cash box and all she could find wasstacks of Confederate bonds and three thousand dollars in Confederate bills. That was aboutenough to buy one square meal for them all, she thought ironically, now that Confederate moneywas worth almost less than nothing at all. But if she did have money and could find food, howwould she haul it home to Tara? Why had God let the old horse die? Even that sorry animal Rhetthad stolen would make all the difference in the world to them. Oh, those fine sleek mules whichused to kick up their heels in the pasture across the road, and the handsome carriage horses, herlittle mare, the girls ponies and Geralds big stallion racing about and tearing up the turf Oh, forone of them, even the balkiest mule!

But, no matterwhen her foot healed she would walk to Jonesboro. It would be the longestwalk she had ever taken in her life, but walk it she would. Even if the Yankees had burned the towncompletely, she would certainly find someone in the neighborhood who could tell her where to getfood. Wades pinched face rose up before her eyes. He didnt like yams, he repeated; wanted adrumstick and some rice and gravy.

The bright sunlight in the front yard suddenly clouded and the trees blurred through tears.

Scarlett dropped her head on her arms and struggled not to cry. Crying was so useless now. Theonly time crying ever did any good was when there was a man around from whom you wished favors.

As she crouched there, squeezing her eyes tightly to keep back the tears, she was startled bythe sound of trotting hooves. But she did not raise her head. She had imagined that sound too oftenin the nights and days of these last two weeks, just as she had imagined she heard the rustle ofEllens skirts. Her heart hammered, as it always did at such moments, before she told herselfsternly: Dont be a fool.

But the hooves slowed down in a startlingly natural way to the rhythm of a walk and there wasthe measured scrunch-scrunch on the gravel. It was a horsethe Tarletons, the Fontaines! Shelooked up quickly. It was a Yankee cavalryman.

Automatically, she dodged behind the curtain and peered fascinated at him through the dim foldsof the cloth, so startled that the breath went out of her lungs with a gasp.

He sat slouched in the saddle, thick, rough-looking with an unkempt black beard stragglingoverhisunbuttonedbraeja(a) cket.Littleclose-seteyes,s(man) quinting in the sun glare, calmlysurveyed the house from beneath the visor of his tight brae cap. As he slowly dismounted andtossed the bridle reins over the hitching post, Scarletts breath came back to her as suddenly andpainfully as after a blow in the stomach. A Yankee, a Yankee with a long pistol on his hip! And shewas alone in the house with three sick girls and the babies!

As he lounged up the walk, hand on holster, beady little eyes glancing to right and left, akaleidoscope of jumbled pictures spun in her mind, stories Aunt Pittypat had whispered of attackson unprotected women, throat cuttings, houses burned over the heads of dying women, childrenbayoneted because they cried, all of the unspeakable horrors that lay bound up in the name ofYankee.

Her first terrified impulse was to hide in the closet, crawl under the bed, fly down the back stairsand run screaming to the swamp, anything to escape him. Then she heard his cautious feet on thefront steps and his stealthy tread as he entered the hall and she knew that escape was cut off. Toocold with fear to move, she heard his progress from room to room downstairs, his steps growinglouder and bolder as he discovered no one. Now he was in the dining room and in a moment hewould walk out into the kitchen.

At the thought of the kitchen, rage suddenly leaped up in Scarletts breast, so sharply that itjabbed at her heart like a knife thrust, and fear fell away before her overpowering fury. Thekitchen! There, over the open kitchen fire were two pots, one filled with apples stewing and theother with a hodgepodge of vegetables brought painfully from Twelve Oaks and the Macintoshgardendinner that must serve for nine hungry people and hardly enough for two. Scarlett hadbeen restraining her appetite for hours, waiting for the return of the others and the thought of theYankee eating their meager meal made her shake with anger.

God damn them all! They descended like locusts and left Tara to starve slowly and now theywere back again to steal the poor leavings. Her empty stomach writhed within her. By God, thiswas one Yankee who would do no more stealing!

She slipped off her worn shoe and, barefooted, she pattered swiftly to the bureau, not evenfeeling her festered toe. She opened the top drawer soundlessly and caught up the heavy pistol shehad brought from Atlanta, the weapon Charles had worn but never fired. She fumbled in the leatherbox that hung on the wall below his saber and brought out a cap. She slipped it into place with ahand that did not shake. Quickly and noiselessly, she ran into the upper hall and down the stairs,steadying herself on the banisters with one hand and holding the pistol close to her thigh in thefolds of her skirt.

Whos there? cried a nasal voice and she stopped on the middle of the stairs, the blood thudding in her ears so loudly she could hardly hear him. Halt or Ill shoot! came the voice.

He stood in the door of the dining room, crouched tensely, his pistol in one hand and, in theother, the small rosewood sewing box fitted with gold thimble, gold-handled scissors and tinygold-topped acorn of emery. Scarletts legs felt cold to the knees but rage scorched her face.

Ellens sewing box in his hands. She wanted to cry: Put it down! Put it down, you dirty butwords would not come. She could only stare over the banisters at him and watch his face changefrom harsh tenseness to a half-contemptuous, half-ingratiating smile.

So there is somebody at home, he said, slipping his pistol back into its holster and moving intothe hall until he stood directly below her. All alone, little lady?

Like lightning, she shoved her weapon over the banisters and into the startled bearded face.

Before he could even fumble at his belt, she pulled the trigger. The back kick of the pistol madeher reel, as the roar of the explosion filled her ears and the acrid smoke stung her nostrils. The mancrashed backwards to the floor, sprawling into the dining room with a violence that shook thefurniture. The box clattered from his hand, the contents spilling about him. Hardly aware that shewas moving, Scarlett ran down the stairs and stood over him, gazing down into what was left ofthe face above the beard, a bloody pit where the nose had been, glazing eyes burned with powder.

As she looked, two streams of blood crept across the shining floor, one from his face and one fromthe back of his head.

Yes, he was dead. Undoubtedly. She had killed a man.

The smoke curled slowly to the ceiling and the red streams widened about her feet. For atimeless moment she stood there and in the still hot hush of the summer morning every irrelevantsound and scent seemed magnified, the quick thudding of her heart, like, a drumbeat, the slightrough rustling of the magnolia leaves, the far-off plaintive sound of a swamp bird and the sweetsmell of the flowers outside the window.

She had killed a man, she who took care never to be in at the kill on a hunt, she who could notbear the squealing of a hog at slaughter or the squeak of a rabbit in a snare. Murder! she thoughtdully. Ive done murder. Oh, this cant be happening to me! Her eyes went to the stubby hairy handon the floor so close to the sewing box and suddenly she was vitally alive again, vitally glad with acool tigerish joy. She could have ground her heel into the gaping wound which had been his noseand taken sweet pleasure in the feel of his warm blood on her bare feet. She had struck a blow ofrevenge for Taraand for Ellen.

There were hurried stumbling steps in the upper hall, a pause and then more steps, weakdragging steps now, punctuated by metallic clankings. A sense of time and reality coming back toher, Scarlett looked up and saw Melanie at the top of the stairs, clad only in the ragged chemisewhich served her as a nightgown, her weak arm weighed down with Charles saber. Melanies eyestook in the scene below in its entirety, the sprawling blue-clad body in the red pool, the sewing boxbeside him, Scarlett, barefooted and gray-faced, clutching the long pistol.

In silence her eyes met Scarletts. There was a glow of grim pride in her usually gentle face,approbation and a fierce joy in her smile that equaled the fiery tumult in Scarletts own bosom.

Whywhyshes like me! She understands how I feel! thought Scarlett in that long moment Shed have done the same thing!

With a thrill she looked up at the frail swaying girl for whom she had never had any feelings butof dislike and contempt. Now, straggling against hatred for Ashleys wife, there surged a feeling ofadmiration and comradeship. She saw in a flash of clarity untouched by any petty emotion thatbeneath the gentle voice and the dovelike eyes of Melanie there was a thin flashing blade ofunbreakable steel, felt too that there were banners and bugles of courage in Melanies quiet blood.

Scarlett! Scarlett! shrilled the weak frightened voices of Suellen and Carreen, muffled by theirclosed door, and Wades voice screamed Auntee! Auntee! Swiftly Melanie put her finger to herlips and, laying the sword on the top step, she painfully made her way down the upstairs hall andopened the door of the sick room.

Dont be scared, chickens! came her voice with teasing gaiety. Your big sister was trying toclean the rust off Charles pistol and it went off and nearly scared her to death! ... Now, WadeHampton, Mama just shot off your dear Papas pistol! When you are bigger, she will let you shootit.

What a cool liar! thought Scarlett with admiration. I couldnt have thought that quickly. Butwhy lie? Theyve got to know Ive done it.

She looked down at the body again and now revulsion came over her as her rage and frightmelted away, and her knees began to quiver with the reaction. Melanie dragged herself to the topstep again and started down, holding onto the banisters, her pale lower lip caught between herteeth.

Go back to bed, silly, youll kill yourself! Scarlett cried, but the half-naked Melanie made herpainful way down into the lower hall.

Scarlett, she whispered, we must get him out of here and bury him. He may not be alone andif they find him here She steadied herself on Scarletts arm.

He must be alone, said Scarlett. I didnt see anyone else from the upstairs window. He mustbe a deserter.

Even if he is alone, no one must know about it. The negroes might talk and then theyd comeand get you. Scarlett, we must get him hidden before the folks come back from the swamp.

Her mind prodded to action by the feverish urgency of Melanies voice, Scarlett thought hard.

I could bury him in the corner of the garden under the arborthe ground is soft there wherePork dug up the whisky barrel. But how will I get him there?

Well both take a leg and drag him, said Melanie firmly.

Reluctantly, Scarletts admiration went still higher.

You couldnt drag a cat. Ill drag him, she said roughly. You go back to bed. Youll killyourself. Dont dare try to help me either or Ill carry you upstairs myself.

Melanies white face broke into a sweet understanding smile. You are very dear, Scarlett, shesaid and softly brushed her lips against Scarletts cheek. Before Scarlett could recover from hersurprise, Melanie went on: If you can drag him out, Ill mop up thethe mess before the folks get home, and Scarlett

Yes?

Do you suppose it would be dishonest to go through his knapsack? He might have something toeat.

I do not, said Scarlett, annoyed that she had not thought of this herself. You take theknapsack and Ill go through his pockets.

Stooping over the dead man with distaste, she unbuttoned the remaining buttons of his jacketand systematically began rifling his pockets.

Dear God, she whispered, pulling out a bulging wallet, wrapped about with a rag. MelanieMelly, I think its full of money!

Melanie said nothing but abruptly sat down on the floor and leaned back against the wall.

You look, she said shakily. Im feeling a little weak.

Scarlett tore off the rag and with trembling hands opened the leather folds.

Look, Mellyjust look!

Melanie looked and her eyes dilated. Jumbled together was a mass of bills, United Statesgreenbacks mingling with Confederate money and, glinting from between them, were one ten-dollar gold piece and two five-dollar gold pieces.

Dont stop to count it now, said Melanie as Scarlett began fingering the bills. We haventtime

Do you realize, Melanie, that this money means that well eat?

Yes, yes, dear. I know but we havent time now. You look in his other pockets and Ill take theknapsack.

Scarlett was loath to put down the wallet. Bright vistas opened before herreal money, theYankees horse, food! There was a God after all, and He did provide, even if He did take very oddways of providing. She sat on her haunches and stared at the wallet smiling. Food! Melanieplucked it from her handsHurry! she said.

The trouser pockets yielded nothing except a candle end, a jackknife, a plug of tobacco and a bitof twine. Melanie removed from the knapsack a small package of coffee which she sniffed as if itwere the sweetest of perfumes, hardtack and, her face changing, a miniature of a little girl in a goldframe set with seed pearls, a garnet brooch, two broad gold bracelets with tiny dangling goldchains, a gold thimble, a small silver babys cup, gold embroidery scissors, a diamond solitaire ringand a pair of earrings with pendant pear-shaped diamonds, which even their unpracticed eyes couldtell were well over a carat each.

A thief! whispered Melanie, recoiling from the still body. Scarlett, he must have stolen all ofthis!

Of course, said Scarlett. And he came here hoping to steal more from us.

Im glad you killed him, said Melanie her gentle eyes hard. Now hurry, darling, and get himout of here.

Scarlett bent over, caught the dead man by his boots and tugged. How heavy he was and howweak she suddenly felt. Suppose she shouldnt be able to move him? Turning so that she backedthe corpse, she caught a heavy boot under each arm and threw her weight forward. He moved andshe jerked again. Her sore foot, forgotten in the excitement, now gave a tremendous throb thatmade her grit her teeth and shift her weight to the heel. Tugging and straining, perspirationdripping from her forehead, she dragged him down the hall, a red stain following her path.

If he bleeds across the yard, we cant hide it, she gasped. Give me your shimmy, Melanie,and Ill wad it around his head.

Melanies white face went crimson.

Dont be silly, I wont look at you, said Scarlett If I had on a petticoat or pantalets Id usethem.

Crouching back against the wall, Melanie pulled the ragged linen garment over her head andsilently tossed it to Scarlett, shielding herself as best she could with her arms.

Thank God, Im not that modest, thought Scarlett, feeling rather than seeing Melanies agonyof embarrassment, as she wrapped the ragged cloth about the shattered face.

By a series of limping jerks, she pulled the body down the hall toward the back porch and,pausing to wipe her forehead with the back of her hand, glanced back toward Melanie, sittingagainst the wall hugging her thin knees to her bare breasts. How silly of Melanie to be botheringabout modesty at a time like this, Scarlett thought irritably. It was just part of her nicey-nice way ofacting which had always made Scarlett despise her. Then shame rose in her. After allafter all,Melanie had dragged herself from bed so soon after having a baby and had come to her aid with aweapon too heavy even for her to lift. That had taken courage, the kind of courage Scarlett honestlyknew she herself did not possess, the thin-steel, spun silk courage which had characterizedMelanie on the terrible night Atlanta fell and on the long trip home. It was the same intangible,unspectacular courage that all the Wilkeses possessed, a quality which Scarlett did not understandbut to which she gave grudging tribute.

Go back to bed, she threw over her shoulder. Youll be dead if you dont. Ill clean up themess after Ive buried him.

Ill do it with one of the rag rugs, whispered Melanie, looking at the pool of blood with a sickface.

Well, kill yourself then and see if I care! And if any of the folks come back before Im finished,keep them in the house and tell them the horse just walked in from nowhere.

Melanie sat shivering in the morning sunlight and covered her ears against the sickening seriesof thuds as the dead mans head bumped down the porch steps.

No one questioned whence the horse had come. It was so obvious he was a stray from the recentbattle and they were well pleased to have him. The Yankee lay in the shallow pit Scarlett hadscraped out under the scuppernong arbor. The uprights which held the thick vines were rotten and that night Scarlett hacked at them with the kitchen knife until they fell and the tangled mass ranwild over the grave. The replacing of these posts was one bit of repair work Scarlett did notsuggest and, if the negroes knew why, they kept their silence.

No ghost rose from that shallow grave to haunt her in the long nights when she lay awake, tootired to sleep. No feeling of horror or remorse assailed her at the memory. She wondered why,knowing that even a month before she could never have done the deed. Pretty young Mrs. Hamilton,with her dimple and her jingling earbobs and her helpless little ways, blowing a mans face toa pulp and then burying him in a hastily scratched-out hole! Scarlett grinned a little grimlythinking of die consternation such an idea would bring to those who knew her.

I wont think about it any more, she decided. Its over and done with and Id have been aninny not to kill him. I reckonI reckon I must have changed a little since coming home or else Icouldnt have done it.

She did not think of it consciously but in the back of her mind, whenever she was confronted byan unpleasant and difficult task, the idea lurked giving her strength: Ive done murder and so I cansurely do this.

She had changed more than she knew and the shell of hardness which had begun to form abouther heart when she lay in the slave garden at Twelve Oaks was slowly thickening.

Now that she had a horse, Scarlett could find out for herself what had happened to theirneighbors. Since she came home she had wondered despairingly a thousand times: Are we theonly folks left in the County? Has everybody else been burned out? Have they all refugeed toMacon? With the memory of the ruins of Twelve Oaks, the Macintosh place and the Slatteryshack fresh in her mind, she almost dreaded to discover the truth. But it was better to know theworst than to wonder. She decided to ride to the Fontaines first, not because they were the nearestneighbors but because old Dr. Fontaine might be there. Melanie needed a doctor. She was notrecovering as she should and Scarlett was frightened by her white weakness.

So on the first day when her foot had healed enough to stand a slipper, she mounted theYankees horse. One foot in the shortened stirrup and the other leg crooked about the pommel in anapproximation of a side saddle, she set out across the fields toward Mimosa, steeling herself to findit burned.

To her surprise and pleasure, she saw the faded yellow-stucco house standing amid the mimosatrees, looking as it had always looked. Warm happiness, happiness that almost brought tears,flooded her when the three Fontaine women came out of the house to welcome her with kisses andcries of joy.

But when the first exclamations of affectionate greeting were over and they all had trooped intothe dining room to sit down, Scarlett felt a chill. The Yankees had not reached Mimosa because itwas far off the main road. And so the Fontaines still had their stock and their provisions, butMimosa was held by the same strange silence that hung over Tara, over the whole countryside. Allthe slaves except four women house servants had run away, frightened by the approach of theYankees. There was not a man on the place unless Sallys little boy, Joe, hardly out of diapers, could be counted as a man. Alone in the big house were Grandma Fontaine, in her seventies, herdaughter-in-law who would always be known as Young Miss, though she was in her fifties, andSally, who had barely turned twenty. They were far away from neighbors and unprotected, but ifthey were afraid it did not show on their faces. Probably, thought Scarlett, because Sally andYoung Miss were too afraid of the porcelain-frail but indomitable old Grandma to dare voice anyqualms. Scarlett herself was afraid of the old lady, for she had sharp eyes and a sharper tongue andScarlett had felt them both in the past.

Though unrelated by blood and far apart in age, there was a kinship of spirit and experiencebinding these women together. All three wore home-dyed mourning, all were worn, sad, worried,all bitter with a bitterness that did not sulk or complain but, nevertheless, peered out from behindtheir smiles and their words of welcome. For their slaves were gone, their money was worthless,Sallys husband, Joe, had died at Gettysburg and Young Miss was also a widow, for young Dr.

Fontaine had died of dysentery at Vicksburg. The other two boys, Alex and Tony, were somewherein Virginia and nobody knew whether they were alive or dead; and old Dr. Fontaine was offsomewhere with Wheelers cavalry.

And the old fool is seventy-three years old though he tries to act younger and hes as full ofrheumatism as a hog is of fleas, said Grandma, proud of her husband, the light in her eyes belyingher sharp words.

Have you all had any news of whats been happening in Atlanta? asked Scarlett when theywere comfortably settled. Were completely buried at Tara.

Law, child, said Old Miss, taking charge of the conversation, as was her habit, were in thesame fix as you are. We dont know a thing except that Sherman finally got the town.

So he did get it. Whats he doing now? Wheres the fighting now?

And how would three lone women out here in the country know about the war when wehavent seen a letter or a newspaper in weeks? said the old lady tartly. One of our darkies talkedto a darky whod seen a darky whod been to Jonesboro, and except for that we havent heardanything. What they said was that the Yankees were just squatting in Atlanta resting up their menand their horses, but whether its true or not youre as good a judge as I am. Not that they wouldntneed a rest, after the fight we gave them.

To think youve been at Tara all this time and we didnt know! Young Miss broke in. Oh, howI blame myself for not riding over to see! But theres been so much to do here with most all thedarkies gone that I just couldnt get away. But I should have made time to go. It wasnt neighborlyof me. But, of course, we thought the Yankees had burned Tara like they did Twelve Oaks and theMacintosh house and that your folks had gone to Macon. And we never dreamed you were home,Scarlett.

Well, how were we to know different when Mr. OHaras darkies came through here so scaredthey were popeyed and told us the Yankees were going to burn Tara? Grandma interrupted.

And we could see Sally began.

Im telling this, please, said Old Miss shortly. And they said the Yankees were camped allover Tara and your folks were fixing to go to Macon. And then that night we saw the glare of fire over toward Tara and it lasted for hours and it scared our fool darkies so bad they all ran off. Whatburned?

All our cottona hundred and fifty thousand dollars worth, said Scarlett bitterly.

Be thankful it wasnt your house, said Grandma, leaning her chin on her cane. You canalways grow more cotton and you cant grow a house. By the bye, had you all started picking yourcotton?

No, said Scarlett, and now most of it is ruined. I dont imagine theres more than three balesleft standing, in the far field in the creek bottom, and what earthly good will it do? All our fieldhands are gone and theres nobody to pick it.

Mercy me, all our field hands are gone and theres nobody to pick it! mimicked Grandma andbent a satiric glance on Scarlett Whats wrong with your own pretty paws, Miss, and those of yoursisters?

Me? Pick cotton? cried Scarlett aghast, as if Grandma had been suggesting some repulsivecrime. Like a field hand? Like white trash? Like the Slattery women?

White trash, indeed! Well, isnt this generation soft and ladylike! Let me tell you, Miss, when Iwas a girl my father lost all his money and I wasnt above doing honest work with my hands and inthe fields too, till Pa got enough money to buy some more darkies. Ive hoed my row and Ivepicked my cotton and I can do it again if I have to. And it looks like Ill have to. White trash,indeed!

Oh, but Mama Fontaine, cried her daughter-in-law, casting imploring glances at the two girls,urging them to help her smooth the old ladys feathers. That was so long ago, a different dayentirely, and times have changed.

Times never change when theres a need for honest work to be done, stated the sharp-eyed oldlady, refusing to be soothed. And Im ashamed for your mother, Scarlett, to hear you stand thereand talk as though honest work made white trash out of nice people. When Adam delved and Evespan

To change the subject, Scarlett hastily questioned: What about the Tarletons and the Calverts?

Were they burned out? Have they refugeed to Macon?

The Yankees never got to the Tarletons. Theyre off the main road, like we are, but they did getto the Calverts and they stole all their stock and poultry and got all the darkies to run off with them Sally began.

Grandma interrupted.

Hah! They promised all the black wenches silk dresses and gold earbobsthats what they did.

And Cathleen Calvert said some of the troopers went off with the black fools behind them on theirsaddles. Well, all theyll get will be yellow babies and I cant say that Yankee blood will improvethe stock.

Oh, Mama Fontaine!

Dont pull such a shocked face, Jane. Were all married, arent we? And, God knows, weve seen mulatto babies before this.

Why didnt they burn the Calverts house?

The house was saved by the combined accents of the second Mrs. Calvert and that Yankeeoverseer of hers, Hilton, said Old Miss, who always referred to the ex-governess as the secondMrs. Calvert, although the first Mrs. Calvert had been dead twenty years.

We are staunch Union sympathizers,  mimicked the old lady, twanging the words throughher long thin nose. Cathleen said the two of them swore up hill and down dale that the wholepassel of Calverts were Yankees. And Mr. Calvert dead in the Wilderness! And Raiford at Gettysburgand Cade in Virginia with the army! Cathleen was so mortified she said shed rather thehouse had been burned. She said Cade would bust when he came home and heard about it. Butthen, thats what a man gets for marrying a Yankee womanno pride, no decency, always thinkingabout their own skins.  How come they didnt burn Tara, Scarlett?

For a moment Scarlett paused before answering. She knew the very next question would be:

And how are all your folks? And how is your dear mother? She knew she could not tell themEllen was dead. She knew that if she spoke those words or even let herself think of them in thepresence of these sympathetic women, she would burst into a storm of tears and cry until she wassick. And she could not let herself cry. She had not really cried since she came home and she knewthat if she once let down the floodgates, her closely husbanded courage would all be gone. But sheknew, too, looking with confusion at the friendly faces about her, that if she withheld the news ofEllens death, the Fontaines would never forgive her. Grandma in particular was devoted to Ellenand there were very few people in the County for whom the old lady gave a snap of her skinnyfingers.

Well, speak up, said Grandma, looking sharply at her. Dont you know, Miss?

Well, you see, I didnt get home till the day after the battle, she answered hastily. The Yankeeswere all gone then. Pa Pa told me thatthat he got them not to burn the house because Suellenand Carreen were so ill with typhoid they couldnt be moved.

Thats the first time I ever heard of a Yankee doing a decent thing, said Grandma, as if sheregretted hearing anything good about the invaders. And how are the girls now?

Oh, they are better, much better, almost well but quite weak, answered Scarlett. Then, seeingthe question she feared hovering on the old ladys lips, she cast hastily about for some other topicof conversation.

II wonder if you could lend us something to eat? The Yankees cleaned us out like a swarm oflocusts. But, if you are on short rations, just tell me so plainly and

Send over Pork with a wagon and you shall have half of what weve got, rice, meal, ham, somechickens, said Old Miss, giving Scarlett a sudden keen look.

Oh, thats too much! Really, I

Not a word! I wont hear it. What are neighbors for?

You are so kind that I cant But I have to be going now. The folks at home will be worryingabout me.

Grandma rose abruptly and took Scarlett by the arm.

You two stay here, she commanded, pushing Scarlett toward the back porch. I have a privateword for this child. Help me down the steps, Scarlett.

Young Miss and Sally said good-by and promised to come calling soon. They were devoured bycuriosity as to what Grandma had to say to Scarlett but unless she chose to tell them, they wouldnever know. Old ladies were so difficult, Young Miss whispered to Sally as they went back to theirsewing.

Scarlett stood with her hand on the horses bridle, a dull feeling at her heart.

Now, said Grandma, peering into her face, whats wrong at Tara? What are you keepingback?

Scarlett looked up into the keen old eyes and knew she could tell the truth, without tears. No onecould cry in the presence of Grandma Fontaine without her express permission.

Mother is dead, she said flatly.

The hand on her arm tightened until it pinched and the wrinkled lids over the yellow eyesblinked.

Did the Yankees kill her?

She died of typhoid. Diedthe day before I came home.

Dont think about it, said Grandma sternly and Scarlett saw her swallow. And your Pa?

Pa isPa is not himself.

What do you mean? Speak up. Is he ill?

The shockhe is so strangehe is not

Dont tell me hes not himself. Do you mean his mind is unhinged?

It was a relief to hear the truth put so baldly. How good the old lady was to offer no sympathythat would make her cry.

Yes, she said dully, hes lost his mind. He acts dazed and sometimes he cant seem toremember that Mother is dead. Oh, Old Miss, its more than I can stand to see him sit by the hour,waiting for her and so patiently too, and he used to have no more patience than a child. But itsworse when he does remember that shes gone. Every now and then, after hes sat still with his earcocked listening for her, he jumps up suddenly and stamps out of the house and down to theburying ground. And then he comes dragging back with the tears all over his face and he says overand over till I could scream: Katie Scarlett, Mrs. OHara is dead. Your mother is dead, and itsjust like I was hearing it again for the first time. And sometimes, late at night, I hear him callingher and I get out of bed and go to him and tell him shes down at the quarters with a sick darky.

And he fusses because shes always tiring herself out nursing people. And its so hard to get himback to bed. Hes like a child. Oh, I wish Dr. Fontaine was here! I know he could do something forPa! And Melanie needs a doctor too. She isnt getting over her baby like she should

Mellya baby? And shes with you?

Yes.

Whats Melly doing with you? Why isnt she in Macon with her aunt and her kinfolks? I neverthought you liked her any too well, Miss, for all she was Charles sister. Now, tell me all about it.

Its a long story, Old Miss. Dont you want to go back in the house and sit down?

I can stand, said Grandma shortly. And if you told your story in front of the others, theyd bebawling and making you feel sorry for yourself. Now, lets have it.

Scarlett began haltingly with the siege and Melanies condition, but as her story progressedbeneath the sharp old eyes which never faltered in their gaze, she found words, words of powerand horror. It all came back to her, the sickeningly hot day of the babys birth, the agony of fear,the flight and Rhetts desertion. She spoke of the wild darkness of the night, the blazing camp fireswhich might be friends or foes, the gaunt chimneys which met her gaze in the morning sun, thedead men and horses along the road, the hunger, the desolation, the fear that Tara had been burned.

I thought if I could just get home to Mother, she could manage everything and I could lay downthe weary load. On the way home I thought the worst had already happened to me, but when Iknew she was dead I knew what the worst really was.

She dropped her eyes to the ground and waited for Grandma to speak. The silence was soprolonged she wondered if Grandma could have failed to comprehend her desperate plight. Finallythe old voice spoke and her tones were kind, kinder than Scarlett had ever heard her use inaddressing anyone.

Child, its a very bad thing for a woman to face the worst that can happen to her, because aftershes faced the worst she cant ever really fear anything again. And its very bad for a woman notto be afraid of something. You think I dont understand what youve told mewhat youve beenthrough? Well, I understand very well. When I was about your age I was in the Creek uprising,right after the Fort Mims massacreyes, she said in a far-away voice, just about your age forthat was fifty-odd years ago. And I managed to get into the bushes and hide and I lay there and sawour house burn and I saw the Indians scalp my brothers and sisters. And I could only lie there andpray that the light of the flames wouldnt show up my hiding place. And they dragged Mother outand killed her about twenty feet from where I was lying. And scalped her too. And ever so oftenone Indian would go back to her and sink his tommyhawk into her skull again. II was mymothers pet and I lay there and saw it all. And in the morning I set out for the nearest settlementand it was thirty miles away. It took me three days to get there, through the swamps and theIndians, and afterward they thought Id lose my mind.  Thats where I met Dr. Fontaine. Helooked after me. ... Ah, well, thats been fifty years ago, as I said, and since that time Ive neverbeen afraid of anything or anybody because Id known the worst that could happen to me. And thatlack of fear has gotten me into a lot of trouble and cost me a lot of happiness. God intended womento be timid frightened creatures and theres something unnatural about woman who isnt afraid. ... Scarlett, always save something to fear even as you save something (a) to love. ...

Her voice trailed off and she stood silent with eyes looking back over half a century to the daywhen she had been afraid. Scarlett moved impatiently. She had thought Grandma was going tounderstand and perhaps show her some way to solve her problems. But like all old people shed gotten to talking about things that happened before anyone was born, things no one was interestedin. Scarlett wished she had not confided in her.

Well, go home, child, or theyll be worrying about you, she said suddenly. Send Pork withthe wagon this afternoon. ... And dont think you can lay down the load, ever. Because you cant. Iknow.

Indian summer lingered into November that year and the warm days were bright days for thoseat Tara. The worst was over. They had a horse now and they could ride instead of walk. They hadfried eggs for breakfast and fried ham for supper to vary the monotony of the yams, peanuts anddried apples, and on one festal occasion they even had roast chicken. The old sow had finally beencaptured and she and her brood rooted and grunted happily under the house where they werepenned. Sometimes they squealed so loudly no one in the house could talk but it was a pleasantsound. It meant fresh pork for the white folks and chitterlings for the negroes when cold weatherand hog-killing time should arrive, and it meant food for the winter for all.

Scarletts visit to the Fontaines had heartened her more than she realized. Just the knowledgethat she had neighbors, that some of the family friends and old homes had survived, drove out theterrible loss and alone feeling which had oppressed her in her first weeks at Tara. And theFontaines and Tarletons, whose plantations had not been in the path of the army, were mostgenerous in sharing what little they had. It was the tradition of the County that neighbor helpedneighbor and they refused to accept a penny from Scarlett, telling her that she would do the samefor them and she could pay them back, in kind, next year when Tara was again producing.

Scarlett now had food for her household, she had a horse, she had the money and jewelry takenfrom the Yankee straggler, and the greatest need was new clothing. She knew it would be riskybusiness sending Pork south to buy clothes, when the horse might be captured by either Yankees orConfederates. But, at least, she had the money with which to buy the clothes, a horse and wagonfor the trip, and perhaps Pork could make the trip without getting caught. Yes, the worst was over.

Every morning when Scarlett arose she thanked God for the pale-blue sky and the warm sun, foreach day of good weather put off the inevitable time when warm clothing would be needed. Andeach warm day saw more and more cotton piling up in the empty slave quarters, the only storageplace left on the plantation. There was more cotton in the fields than she or Pork had estimated,probably four bales, and soon the cabins would be full.

Scarlett had not intended to do any cotton picking herself, even after Grandma Fontaines tartremark. It was unthinkable that she, an OHara lady, now the mistress of Tara, should work in thefields. It put her on the same level with the snarly haired Mrs. Slattery and Emmie. She hadintended that the negroes should do the field work, while she and the convalescent girls attended tothe house, but here she was confronted with a caste feeling even stronger than her own. Pork,Mammy and Prissy set up outcries at the idea of working in the fields. They reiterated that theywere house niggers, not field hands. Mammy, in particular, declared vehemently that she had nevereven been a yard nigger. She had been born in the Robillard great house, not in the quarters, andhad been raised in Ole Miss bedroom, sleeping on a pallet at the foot of the bed. Dilcey alone saidnothing and she fixed her Prissy with an unwinking eye that made her squirm.

Scarlett refused to listen to the protests and drove them all into the cotton rows. But Mammyand Pork worked so slowly and with so many lamentations that Scarlett sent Mammy back to thekitchen to cook and Pork to the woods and the river with snares for rabbits and possums and linesfor fish. Cotton picking was beneath Porks dignity but hunting and fishing were not.

Scarlett next had tried her sisters and Melanie in the fields, but that had worked no better.

Melanie had picked neatly, quickly and willingly for an hour in the hot sun and then fainted quietlyand had to stay in bed for a week. Suellen, sullen and tearful, pretended to faint too, but came backto consciousness spitting like an angry cat when Scarlett poured a gourdful of water in her face. Finallyshe refused point-blank.

I wont work in the fields like a darky! You cant make me. What if any of our friends everheard of it? What ifif Mr. Kennedy ever knew? Oh, if Mother knew about this

You just mention Mothers name once more, Suellen OHara, and Ill slap you flat, criedScarlett. Mother worked harder than any darky on this place and you know it, Miss Fine Airs!

She did not! At least, not in the fields. And you cant make me. Ill tell Papa on you and hewont make me work!

Dont you dare go bothering Pa with any of our troubles! cried Scarlett, distracted betweenindignation at her sister and fear for Gerald.

Ill help you, Sissy, interposed Carreen docilely. Ill work for Sue and me too. She isnt wellyet and she shouldnt be out in the sun.

Scarlett said gratefully: Thank you, Sugarbaby, but looked worriedly at her younger sister.

Carreen, who had always been as delicately pink and white as the orchard blossoms that arescattered by the spring wind, was no longer pink but still conveyed in her sweet thoughtful face ablossomlike quality. She had been silent, a little dazed since she came back to consciousness andfound Ellen gone, Scarlett a termagant, the world changed and unceasing labor the order of thenew day. It was not in Carreens delicate nature to adjust herself to change. She simply could notcomprehend what had happened and she went about Tara like a sleepwalker, doing exactly whatshe was told. She looked, and was, frail but she was willing, obedient and obliging. When she wasnot doing Scarletts bidding, her rosary beads were always in her hands and her lips moving inprayers for her mother and for Brent Tarleton. It did not occur to Scarlett that Carreen had takenBrents death so seriously and that her grief was unhealed. To Scarlett, Carreen was still babysister, far too young to have had a really serious love affair.

Scarlett, standing in the sun in the cotton rows, her back breaking from the eternal bending andher hands roughened by the dry bolls, wished she had a sister who combined Suellens energy andstrength with Carreens sweet disposition. For Carreen picked diligently and earnestly. But, aftershe had labored for an hour it was obvious that she, and not Suellen, was the one not yet wellenough for such work. So Scarlett sent Carreen back to the house too.

There remained with her now in the long rows only Dilcey and Prissy. Prissy picked lazily,spasmodically, complaining of her feet, her back, her internal miseries, her complete weariness,until her mother took a cotton stalk to her and whipped her until she screamed. After that sheworked a little better, taking care to stay far from her mothers reach.

Dilcey worked tirelessly, silently, like a machine, and Scarlett, with her back aching and hershoulder raw from the tugging weight of the cotton bag she carried, thought that Dilcey was worthher weight in gold.

Dilcey, she said, when good times come back, Im not going to forget how youve acted.

Youve been mighty good.

The bronze giantess did not grin pleasedly or squirm under praise like the other negroes. Sheturned an immobile face to Scarlett and said with dignity: Thankee, Mam. But Mist Gerald andMiss Ellen been good to me. Mist Gerald buy my Prissy so I wouldn grieve and I doan forgit it. Iis part Indian and Indians doan forgit them as is good to them. I sorry bout my Prissy. She mightyworthless. Look lak she all nigger lak her pa. Her pa was mighty flighty.

In spite of Scarletts problem of getting help from the others in the picking and in spite of theweariness of doing the labor herself, her spirits lifted as the cotton slowly made its way from thefields to the cabins. There was something about cotton that was reassuring, steadying. Tara hadrisen to riches on cotton, even as the whole South had risen, and Scarlett was Southerner enough tobelieve that both Tara and the South would rise again out of the red fields.

Of course, this little cotton she had gathered was not much but it was something. It would bringa little in Confederate money and that little would help her to save the hoarded greenbacks andgold in the Yankees wallet until they had to be spent. Next spring she would try to make theConfederate government send back Big Sam and the other field hands they had commandeered,and if the government wouldnt release them, shed use the Yankees money to hire field handsfrom the neighbors. Next spring, she would plant and plant. ... She straightened her tired back and,looking over the browning autumn fields, she saw next years crop standing sturdy and green, acreupon acre.

Next spring! Perhaps by next spring the war would be over and good times would be back. Andwhether the Confederacy won or lost, times would be better. Anything was better than the constantdanger of raids from both armies. When the war was over, a plantation could earn an honest living.

Oh, if the war were only over! Then people could plant crops with some certainty of reaping them!

There was hope now. The war couldnt last forever. She had her little cotton, she had food, shehad a horse, she had her small but treasured hoard of money. Yes, the worst was over!

Chapter 27

ON A NOONDAY in mid-November, they all sat grouped about the dinner table, eating the lastof the dessert concocted by Mammy from corn meal and dried huckleberries, sweetened withsorghum. There was a chill in the air, the first chill of the year, and Pork, standing behind Scarlettschair, rubbed his hands together in glee and questioned: Ain it bout time fer de hawg killin,Miss Scarlett?

You can taste those chitlins already, cant you? said Scarlett with a grin. Well, I can tastefresh pork myself and if the weather holds for a few days more, well

Melanie interrupted, her spoon at her lips, Listen, dear! Somebodys coming!

Somebody hollerin, said Pork uneasily.

On the crisp autumn air came clear the sound of horses hooves, thudding as swiftly as afrightened heart, and a womans voice, high pitched, screaming: Scarlett! Scarlett!

Eye met eye for a dreadful second around the table before chairs were pushed back andeveryone leaped up. Despite the fear that made it shrill, they recognized the voice of SallyFontaine who, only an hour before, had stopped at Tara for a brief chat on her way to Jonesboro.

Now, as they all rushed pell-mell to crowd the front door, they saw her coming up the drive like thewind on a lathered horse, her hair streaming behind her, her bonnet dangling by its ribbons. Shedid not draw rein but as she galloped madly toward them, she waved her arm back in the directionfrom which she had come.

The Yankees are coming! I saw them! Down the road! The Yankees

She sawed savagely at the horses mouth just in time to swerve him from leaping up the frontsteps. He swung around sharply, covered the side lawn in three leaps and she put him across thefour-foot hedge as if she were on the hunting field. They heard the heavy pounding of his hoovesas he went through the back yard and down the narrow lane between the cabins of the quarters andknew she was cutting across the fields to Mimosa.

For a moment they stood paralyzed and then Suellen and Carreen began to sob and clutch eachothers fingers. Little Wade stood rooted, trembling, unable to cry. What he had feared since thenight he left Atlanta had happened. The Yankees were coming to get him.

Yankees? said Gerald vaguely. But the Yankees have already been here.

Mother of God! cried Scarlett, her eyes meeting Melanies frightened eyes. For a swift instantthere went through her memory again the horrors of her last night in Atlanta, the ruined homes thatdotted the countryside, all the stories of rape and torture and murder. She saw again the Yankeesoldier standing in the hall with Ellens sewing box in his hand. She thought: I shall die. I shalldie right here. I thought we were through with all that. I shall die. I cant stand any more.

Then her eyes fell on the horse saddled and hitched and waiting for Pork to ride him to theTarleton place on an errand. Her horse! Her only horse! The Yankees would take him and the cowand the calf. And the sow and her litter Oh, how many tiring hours it had taken to catch that sowand her agile young! And theyd take the rooster and the setting hens and the ducks the Fontaineshad given her. And the apples and the yams in the pantry bins. And the flour and rice and driedpeas. And the money in the Yankee soldiers wallet. Theyd take everything and leave them tostarve.

They shant have them! she cried aloud and they all turned startled faces to her, fearful hermind had cracked under the tidings. I wont go hungry! They shant have them!

What is it, Scarlett? What is it?

The horse! The cow! The pigs! They shant have them! I wont let them have them!

She turned swiftly to the four negroes who huddled in the doorway, their black faces a peculiarlyashen shade.

The swamp, she said rapidly.

Whut swamp?

The river swamp, you fools! Take the pigs to the swamp. All of you. Quickly. Pork, you andPrissy crawl under the house and get the pigs out. Suellen, you and Carreen fill the baskets with asmuch food as you can carry and get to the woods. Mammy, put the silver in the well again. AndPork! Pork, listen to me, dont stand there like that! Take Pa with you. Dont ask me where! Anywhere!

Go with Pork, Pa. Thats a sweet pa.

Even in her frenzy she thought what the sight of bluecoats might do to Geralds wavering mind.

She stopped and wrung her hands and the frightened sobbing of little Wade who was clutchingMelanies skirt added to her panic.

What shall I do, Scarlett? Melanies voice was calm amid the wailing and tears and scurryingfeet. Though her face was paper white and her whole body trembled, the very quietness of hervoice steadied Scarlett, revealing to her that they all looked to her for commands, for guidance.

The cow and the calf, she said quickly. Theyre in the old pasture. Take the horse and drivethem into the swamp and

Before she could finish her sentence, Melanie shook off Wades clutches and was down the frontsteps and running toward the horse, pulling up her wide skirts as she ran. Scarlett caught a flashingglimpse of thin legs, a flurry of skirts and underclothing and Melanie was in the saddle, her feetdangling far above the stirrups. She gathered up the reins and clapped her heels against theanimals sides and then abruptly pulled him in, her face twisting with horror.

My baby! she cried. Oh, my baby! The Yankees will kill him! Give him to me!

Her hand was on the pommel and she was preparing to slide off but Scarlett screamed at her.

Go on! Go on! Get the cow! Ill look after the baby! Go on, I tell you! Do you think Id letthem get Ashleys baby? Go on!

Melly looked despairingly backward but hammered her heels into the horse and, with ascattering of gravel, was off down the drive toward the pasture.

Scarlett thought: I never expected to see Melly Hamilton straddling a horse! and then she raninto the house. Wade was at her heels, sobbing, trying to catch her flying skirts. As she went up thesteps, three at a bound, she saw Suellen and Carreen with split-oak baskets on their arms, runningtoward the pantry, and Pork tugging none too gently at Geralds arm, dragging him toward theback porch. Gerald was mumbling querulously and pulling away like a child.

From the back yard she heard Mammys strident voice: You, Priss! You git unner dat house an

han me dem shoats! You knows mighty well Ahs too big ter crawl thoo dem lattices. Dilcey,comyere an mek dis wuthless chile

And I thought it was such a good idea to keep the pigs under the house, so nobody could stealthem, thought Scarlett, running into her room. Why, oh, why didnt I build a pen for them downin the swamp?

She tore open her top bureau drawer and scratched about in the clothing until the Yankees wallet was in her hand. Hastily she picked up the solitaire ring and the diamond earbobs fromwhere she had hidden them in her sewing basket and shoved them into the wallet. But where tohide it? In the mattress? Up the chimney? Throw it in the well? Put it in her bosom? No, neverthere! The outlines of the wallet might show through her basque and if the Yankees saw it theywould strip her naked and search her.

I shall die if they do! she thought wildly.

Downstairs there was a pandemonium of racing feet and sobbing voices. Even in her frenzy,Scarlett wished she had Melanie with her, Melly with her quiet voice, Melly who was so brave theday she shot the Yankee. Melly was worth three of the others. Mellywhat had Melly said? Oh,yes, the baby!

Clutching the wallet to her, Scarlett ran across the hall to the room where little Beau wassleeping in the low cradle. She snatched him up into her arms and he awoke, waving small fistsand slobbering sleepily.

She heard Suellen crying: Come on, Carreen! Come on! Weve got enough. Oh, Sister, hurry!

There were wild squealings, indignant gruntings in the back yard and, running to the window,Scarlett saw Mammy waddling hurriedly across the cotton field with a struggling young pig undereach arm. Behind her was Pork also carrying two pigs and pushing Gerald before him. Gerald wasstumping across the furrows, waving his cane.

Leaning out of the window Scarlett yelled: Get the sow, Dilcey! Make Prissy drive her out Youcan chase her across the fields!

Dilcey looked up, her bronzed face harassed. In her apron was a pile of silver tableware. Shepointed under the house.

The sow done bit Prissy and got her penned up unner the house.

Good for the sow, thought Scarlett. She hurried back into her room and hastily gathered fromtheir hiding place the bracelets, brooch, miniature and cup she had found on the dead Yankee. Butwhere to hide them? It was awkward, carrying little Beau in one arm and the wallet and the trinketsin the other. She started to lay him on the bed.

He set up a wail at leaving her arms and a welcome thought came to her. What better hidingplace could there be than a babys diaper? She quickly turned him over, pulled up his dress andthrust the wallet down the diaper next to his backside. He yelled louder at this treatment and shehastily tightened the triangular garment about his threshing legs.

Now, she thought, drawing a deep breath, now for the swamp!

Tucking him screaming under one arm and clutching the jewelry to her with the other, she racedinto the upstairs hall. Suddenly her rapid steps paused, fright weakening her knees. How silent thehouse was! How dreadfully still! Had they all gone off and left her? Hadnt anyone waited for her?

She hadnt meant for them to leave her here alone. These days anything could happen to a lonewoman and with the Yankees comingShe jumped as a slight noise sounded and, turning quickly, saw crouched by the banisters herforgotten son, his eyes enormous with terror. He tried to speak but his throat only worked silently.

Get up, Wade Hampton, she commanded swiftly. Get up and walk. Mother cant carry younow.

He ran to her, like a small frightened animal, and clutching her wide skirt, buried his face in it.

She could feel his small hands groping through the folds for her legs. She started down the stairs,each step hampered by Wades dragging hands and she said fiercely: Turn me loose, Wade! Turnme loose and walk! But the child only clung the closer.

As she reached the landing, the whole lower floor leaped up at her. All the homely, well-lovedarticles of furniture seemed to whisper: Good-by! Good-by! A sob rose in her throat. There wasthe open door of the office where Ellen had labored so diligently and she could glimpse a corner ofthe old secretary. There was the dining room, with chairs pushed awry and food still on the plates.

There on the floor were the rag rugs Ellen had dyed and woven herself. And there was the oldportrait of Grandma Robillard, with bosoms half bared, hair piled high and nostrils cut so deeply asto give her face a perpetual well-bred sneer. Everything which had been part of her earliestmemories, everything bound up with the deepest roots in her: Good-by! Good-by, ScarlettOHara!

The Yankees would burn it allall!

This was her last view of home, her last view except what she might see from the cover of thewoods or the swamp, the tall chimneys wrapped in smoke, the roof crashing in flame.

I cant leave you, she thought and her teeth chattered with fear. I cant leave you. Pawouldnt leave you. He told them theyd have to burn you over his head. Then, theyll burn youover my head for I cant leave you either. Youre all Ive got left.

With the decision, some of her fear fell away and there remained only a congealed feeling in herbreast, as if all hope and fear had frozen. As she stood there, she heard from the avenue the soundof many horses feet, the jingle of bridle bits and sabers rattling in scabbards and a harsh voicecrying a command: Dismount! Swiftly she bent to the child beside her and her voice was urgentbut oddly gentle.

Turn me loose, Wade, honey! You run down the stairs quick and through the back yard towardthe swamp. Mammy will be there and Aunt Melly. Run quickly, darling, and dont be afraid.

At the change in her tone, the boy looked up and Scarlett was appalled at the look in his eyes,like a baby rabbit in a trap.

Oh, Mother of God! she prayed. Dont let him have a convulsion! Notnot before theYankees. They mustnt know we are afraid. And, as the child only gripped her skirt the tighter,she said clearly: Be a little man, Wade. Theyre only a passel of damn Yankees!

And she went down the steps to meet them.

Sherman was marching through Georgia, from Atlanta to the sea. Behind him lay the smokingruins of Atlanta to which the torch had been set as the blue army tramped out. Before him lay threehundred miles of territory virtually undefended save by a few state militia and the old men andyoung boys of the Home Guard.

Here lay the fertile state, dotted with plantations, sheltering the women and children, the veryold and the negroes. In a swath eighty miles wide the Yankees were looting and burning. Therewere hundreds of homes in flames, hundreds of homes resounding with their footsteps. But, toScarlett, watching the bluecoats pour into the front hall, it was not a countrywide affair. It wasentirely personal, a malicious action aimed directly at her and hers.

She stood at the foot of the stairs, the baby in her arms, Wade pressed tightly against her, hishead hidden in her skirts as the Yankees swarmed through the house, pushing roughly past her upthe stairs, dragging furniture onto the front porch, running bayonets and knives into upholstery anddigging inside for concealed valuables. Upstairs they were ripping open mattresses and featherbeds until the air in the hall was thick with feathers that floated softly down on her head. Impotentrage quelled what little fear was left in her heart as she stood helpless while they plundered andstole and ruined.

The sergeant in charge was a bow-legged, grizzled little man with a large wad of tobacco in hischeek. He reached Scarlett before any of his men and, spitting freely on the floor and her skirts,said briefly:

Lemme have what you got in yore hand, lady.

She had forgotten the trinkets she had intended to hide and, with a sneer which she hoped was aseloquent as that pictured on Grandma Robillards face, she flung the articles to the floor and almostenjoyed the rapacious scramble that ensued.

Ill trouble you for thet ring and them earbobs.

Scarlett tucked the baby more securely under her arm so that he hung face downward, crimsonand screaming, and removed the garnet earrings which had been Geralds wedding present toEllen. Then she stripped off the large sapphire solitaire which Charles had given her as an engagementring.

Dont throw um. Hand um to me, said the sergeant, putting out his hands. Them bastards gotenough already. What else have you got? His eyes went over her basque sharply.

For a moment Scarlett went faint, already feeling rough hands thrusting themselves into herbosom, fumbling at her garters.

That is all, but I suppose it is customary to strip your victims?

Oh, Ill take your word, said the sergeant good naturedly, spitting again as he turned away.

Scarlett righted the baby and tried to soothe him, holding her hand over the place on the diaperwhere the wallet was hidden, thanking God that Melanie had a baby and that baby had a diaper.

Upstairs she could hear heavy boots trampling, the protesting screech of furniture pulled acrossthe floor, the crashing of china and mirrors, the curses when nothing of value appeared. From theyard came loud cries: Head um off! Dont let um get away! and the despairing squawks of thehens and quacking and honking of the ducks and geese. A pang went through her as she heard anagonized squealing which was suddenly stilled by a pistol shot and she knew that the sow wasdead. Damn Prissy! She had run off and left her. If only the shoats were safe! If only the familyhad gotten safely to the swamp! But there was no way of knowing.

She stood quietly in the hall while the soldiers boiled about her, shouting and cursing. Wadesfingers were in her skirt in a terrified grip. She could feel his body shaking as he pressed againsther but she could not bring herself to speak reassuringly to him. She could not bring herself to utterany word to the Yankees, either of pleading, protest or anger. She could only thank God that herknees still had the strength to support her, that her neck was still strong enough to hold her headhigh. But when a squad of bearded men came lumbering down the steps, laden with an assortmentof stolen articles and she saw Charles sword in the hands of one, she did cry out.

That sword was Wades. It had been his fathers and his grandfathers sword and Scarlett hadgiven it to the little boy on his last birthday. They had made quite a ceremony of it and Melaniehad cried, cried with tears of pride and sorrowful memory, and kissed him and said he must growup to be a brave soldier like his father and his grandfather. Wade was very proud of it and oftenclimbed upon the table beneath where it hung to pat it. Scarlett could endure seeing her ownpossessions going out of the house in hateful alien hands but not thisnot her little boys pride.

Wade, peering from the protection of her skirts at the sound of her cry, found speech and couragein a mighty sob. Stretching out one hand he cried:

Mine!

You cant take that! said Scarlett swiftly, holding out her hand too.

I cant, hey? said the little soldier who held it, grinning impudently at her. Well, I can! Its aRebel sword!

Itsits not. Its a Mexican War sword. You cant take it. Its my little boys. It was hisgrandfathers! Oh, Captain, she cried, turning to the sergeant, please make him give it to me!

The sergeant, pleased at his promotion, stepped forward.

Lemme see thet sword, Bub, he said. Reluctantly, the little trooper handed it to him. Its got asolid-gold hilt, he said.

The sergeant turned it in his hand, held the hilt up to the sunlight to read the engravedinscription.

To Colonel William R. Hamilton,  he deciphered.  From His Staff. For Gallantry. BuenaVista. 1847.

Ho, lady, he said, I was at Buena Vista myself.

Indeed, said Scarlett icily.

Was I? Thet was hot fightin, lemme tell you. I aint seen such hot fightin in this war as weseen in thet one. So this sword was this little tykes grandaddys?

Yes.

Well, he can have it, said the sergeant, who was satisfied enough with the jewelry and trinketstied up in his handkerchief.

But its got a solid-gold hilt, insisted the little trooper.

Well leave her thet to remember us by, grinned the sergeant.

Scarlett took the sword, not even saying Thank you. Why should she thank these thieves forreturning her own property to her? She held the sword against her while the little cavalrymanargued and wrangled with the sergeant.

By God, Ill give these damn Rebels something to remember me by, shouted the privatefinally when the sergeant, losing his good nature, told him to go to hell and not talk back. The littleman went charging toward the back of the house and Scarlett breathed more easily. They had saidnothing about burning the house. They hadnt told her to leave so they could fire it. Perhapsperhaps The men came rambling into the hall from the upstairs and the out of doors.

Anything? questioned the sergeant.

One hog and a few chickens and ducks.

Some corn and a few yams and beans. That wildcat we saw on the horse must have given thealarm, all right.

Regular Paul Revere, eh?

Well, there aint much here, Sarge. You got the pickins. Lets move on before the wholecountry gets the news were comin.

Didja dig under the smokehouse? They generally buries things there.

Aint no smokehouse.

Didja dig in the nigger cabins?

Nothin but cotton in the cabins. We set fire to it.

For a brief instant Scarlett saw the long hot days in the cotton field, felt again the terrible ache inher back, the raw bruised flesh of her shoulders. All for nothing. The cotton was gone.

You aint got much, for a fac, have you, lady?

Your army has been here before, she said coolly.

Thats a fac. We were in this neighborhood in September, said one of the men, turningsomething in his hand. Id forgot.

Scarlett saw it was Ellens gold thimble that he held. How often she had seen it gleaming in andout of Ellens fancy work. The sight of it brought back too many hurting memories of the slenderhand which had worn it. There it lay in this strangers calloused duly palm and soon it would findits way North and onto the finger of some Yankee woman who would be proud to wear stolenthings. Ellens thimble!

Scarlett dropped her head so the enemy could not see her cry and the tears fell slowly down onthe babys head. Through the blur, she saw the men moving toward the doorway, heard thesergeant calling commands in a loud rough voice. They were going and Tara was safe, but with thepain of Ellens memory on her, she was hardly glad. The sound of the banging sabers and horses

hooves brought little relief and she stood, suddenly weak and nerveless, as they moved off downthe avenue, every man laden with stolen goods, clothing, blankets, pictures, hens and ducks, thesow.

Then to her nostrils was borne the smell of smoke and she turned, too weak with lesseningstrain, to care about the cotton. Through the open windows of the dining room, she saw smokedrifting lazily out of the negro cabins. There went the cotton. There went the tax money and part ofthe money which was to see them through this bitter winter. There was nothing she could do aboutit either, except watch. She had seen fires in cotton before and she knew how difficult they were toput out, even with many men laboring at it. Thank God, the quarters were so far from the house!

Thank God, there was no wind today to carry sparks to the roof of Tara!

Suddenly she swung about, rigid as a pointer, and stared with horror-struck eyes down the hall,down the covered passageway toward the kitchen. There was smoke coming from the kitchen!

Somewhere between the hall and the kitchen, she laid the baby down. Somewhere she flung offWades grip, slinging him against the wall. She burst into the smoke-filled kitchen and reeled back,coughing, her eyes streaming tears from the smoke. Again she plunged in, her skirt held over hernose.

The room was dark, lit as it was by one small window, and so thick with smoke that she wasblinded, but she could hear the hiss and crackle of flames. Dashing a hand across her eyes, shepeered squinting and saw thin lines of flame creeping across the kitchen floor, toward the walls.

Someone had scattered the blazing logs in the open fireplace across the whole room and the tinder-dry pine floor was sucking in the flames and spewing them up like water.

Back she rushed to the dining room and snatched a rag rug from the floor, spilling two chairswith a crash.

Ill never beat it outnever, never! Oh, God, if only there was someone to help! Tara is gonegone! Oh, God! This was what that little wretch meant when he said hed give me something toremember him by! Oh, if Id only let him have the sword!

In the hallway she passed her son lying in the corner with his sword. His eyes were closed andhis face had a look of slack, unearthly peace.

My God! Hes dead! Theyve frightened him to death! she thought in agony but she raced byhim to the bucket of drinking water which always stood in the passageway by the kitchen door.

She soused the end of the rug into the bucket and drawing a deep breath plunged again into thesmoke-filled room slamming the door behind her. For an eternity she reeled and coughed, beatingthe rug against the lines of fire that shot swiftly beyond her. Twice her long skirt took fire and sheslapped it out with her hands. She could smell the sickening smell of her hair scorching, as it cameloose from its pins and swept about her shoulders. The flames raced ever beyond her, toward thewalls of the covered runway, fiery snakes that writhed and leaped and, exhaustion sweeping her,she knew that it was hopeless.

Then the door swung open and the sucking draft flung the flames higher. It closed with a bangand, in the swirling smoke, Scarlett, half blind, saw Melanie, stamping her feet on the flames,beating at them with something dark and heavy. She saw her staggering, heard her coughing,caught a lightning-flash glimpse of her set white face and eyes narrow to slits against the smoke,saw her small body curving back and forth as she swung her rug up and down. For another eternitythey fought and swayed, side by side, and Scarlett could see that the lines of fire were shortening.

Then suddenly Melanie turned toward her and, with a cry, hit her across the shoulders with all hermight. Scarlett went down in a whirlwind of smoke and darkness. When she opened her eyes shewas lying on the back porch, her head pillowed comfortably on Melanies lap, and the afternoonsunlight was shining on her face. Her hands, face and shoulders smarted intolerably from burns.

Smoke was still rolling from the quarters, enveloping the cabins in thick clouds, and the smell ofburning cotton was strong. Scarlett saw wisps of smoke drifting from the kitchen and she stirredfrantically to rise.

But she was pushed back as Melanies calm voice said: Lie still, dear. The fires out.

She lay quiet for a moment, eyes closed, sighing with relief, and heard the slobbery gurgle of thebaby near by and the reassuring sound of Wades hiccoughing. So he wasnt dead, thank God! Sheopened her eyes and looked up into Melanies face. Her curls were singed, her face black withsmut but her eyes were sparkling with excitement and she was smiling.

You look like a nigger, murmured Scarlett, burrowing her head wearily into its soft pillow.

And you look like the end man in a minstrel show, replied Melanie equably. Why did youhave to hit me?

Because, my darling, your back was on fire. I didnt dream youd faint, though the Lord knowsyouve had enough today to kill you. ... I came back as soon as I got the stock safe in the woods. Inearly died, thinking about you and the baby alone. Didthe Yankees harm you?

If you mean did they rape me, no, said Scarlett, groaning as she tried to sit up. ThoughMelanies lap was soft, the porch on which she was lying was far from comfortable. But theyvestolen everything, everything. Weve lost everything Well, what is there to look so happyabout?

We havent lost each other and our babies are all right and we have a roof over our heads, saidMelanie and there was a lilt in her voice. And thats all anyone can hope for now. ... Goodness butBeau is wet! I suppose the Yankees even stole his extra diapers. He Scarlett, what on earth is inhis diaper?

She thrust a suddenly frightened hand down the babys back and brought up the wallet. For amoment she looked at it as if she had never seen it before and then she began to laugh, peal on pealof mirth that had in it no hint of hysteria.

Nobody but you would ever have thought of it, she cried and flinging her arms aroundScarletts neck she kissed her. You are the beatenest sister I ever had!

Scarlett permitted the embrace because she was too tired to struggle, because the words of praisebrought balm to her spirit and because, in the dark smoke-filled kitchen, there had been born agreater respect for her sister-in-law, a closer feeling of comradeship.

Ill say this for her, she thought grudgingly, shes always there when you need her.

Chapter 28

COLD WEATHER set in abruptly with a killing frost Chilling winds swept beneath the doorsills and rattled the loose windowpanes with a monotonous tinkling sound. The last of the leaves fellfrom the bare trees and only the pines stood clothed, black and cold against pale skies. The ruttedred roads were frozen to flintiness and hunger rode the winds through Georgia.

Scarlett recalled bitterly her conversation with Grandma Fontaine. On that afternoon two monthsago, which now seemed years in the past, she had told the old lady she had already known theworst which could possibly happen to her, and she had spoken from the bottom of her heart. Nowthat remark sounded like schoolgirl hyperbole. Before Shermans men came through Tara thesecond time, she had her small riches of food and money, she had neighbors more fortunate thanshe and she had the cotton which would tide her over until spring. Now the cotton was gone, thefood was gone, the money was of no use to her, for there was no food to buy with it, and the neighborswere in worse plight than she. At least, she had the cow and the calf, a few shoats and thehorse, and the neighbors had nothing but the little they had been able to hide in the woods and buryin the ground.

Fairhill, the Tarleton home, was burned to the foundations, and Mrs. Tarleton and the four girlswere existing in the overseers house. The Munroe house near Lovejoy was leveled too. Thewooden wing of Mimosa had burned and only the thick resistant stucco of the main house and thefrenzied work of the Fontaine women and their slaves with wet blankets and quilts had saved itThe Calverts house had again been spared, due to the intercession of Hilton, the Yankee overseer,but there was not a head of livestock, not a fowl, not an ear of corn left on the place.

At Tara and throughout the County, the problem was food. Most of the families had nothing atall but the remains of their yam crops and their peanuts and such game as they could catch in thewoods. What they had, each shared with less fortunate friends, as they had done in moreprosperous days. But the time soon came when there was nothing to share.

At Tara, they ate rabbit and possum and catfish, if Pork was lucky. On other days a smallamount of milk, hickory nuts, roasted acorns and yams. They were always hungry. To Scarlett itseemed that at every turn she met outstretched hands, pleading eyes. The sight of them drove heralmost to madness, for she was as hungry as they.

She ordered the calf killed, because he drank so much of the precious milk, and that nighteveryone ate so much fresh veal all of them were ill. She knew that she should kill one of theshoats but she put it off from day to day, hoping to raise them to maturity. They were so small.

There would be so little of them to eat if they were killed now and so much more if they could besaved a little longer. Nightly she debated with Melanie the advisability of sending Pork abroad onthe horse with some greenbacks to try to buy food. But the fear that the horse might be capturedand the money taken from Pork deterred them. They did not know where the Yankees were. Theymight be a thousand miles away or only across the river. Once, Scarlett, in desperation, started toride out herself to search for food, but the hysterical outbursts of the whole family fearful of theYankees made her abandon the plan.

Pork foraged far, at times not coming home all night, and Scarlett did not ask him where hewent. Sometimes he returned with game, sometimes with a few ears of corn, a bag of dried peas.

Once he brought home a rooster which he said he found in the woods. The family ate it with relishbut a sense of guilt, knowing very well Pork had stolen it, as he had stolen the peas and corn. One night soon after this, he tapped on Scarletts door long after the house was asleep and sheepishlyexhibited a leg peppered with small shot. As she bandaged it for him, he explained awkwardly thatwhen attempting to get into a hen coop at Fayetteville, he had been discovered. Scarlett did not askwhose hen coop but patted Porks shoulder gently, tears in her eyes. Negroes were provokingsometimes and stupid and lazy, but there was loyalty in them that money couldnt buy, a feeling ofoneness with their white folks which made them risk their lives to keep food on the table.

In other days Porks pilferings would have been serious matter, probably calling for a whipping.Inotherdaysshewouldhavebeenforcedatl(a) east to reprimand him severely. Alwaysremember, dear, Ellen had said, you are responsible for the moral as well as the physical welfareof the darkies God has entrusted to your care. You must realize that they are like children and mustbe guarded from themselves like children, and you must always set them a good example.

But now, Scarlett pushed that admonition into the back of her mind. That she was encouragingtheft, and perhaps theft from people worse off than she, was no longer a matter for conscience. Infact the morals of the affair weighed lightly upon her. Instead of punishment or reproof, she onlyregretted he had been shot.

You must be more careful, Pork. We dont want to lose you. What would we do without you?

Youve been mighty good and faithful and when we get some money again, Im going to buy you abig gold watch and engrave on it something out of the Bible. Well done, good and faithfulservant.

Pork beamed under the praise and gingerly rubbed his bandaged leg.

Dat soun mighty fine, Miss Scarlett. Wen you speckin ter git dat money?

I dont know, Pork, but Im going to get it some time, somehow. She bent on him an unseeingglance that was so passionately bitter he stirred uneasily, Some day, when this war is over, Imgoing to have lots of money, and when I do Ill never be hungry or cold again. None of us will everbe hungry or cold. Well all wear fine clothes and have fried chicken every day and

Then she stopped. The strictest rule at Tara, one which she herself had made and which sherigidly enforced, was that no one should ever talk of the fine meals they had eaten in the past orwhat they would eat now, if they had the opportunity.

Pork slipped from the room as she remained staring moodily into the distance. In the old days,now dead and gone, life had been so complex, so full of intricate and complicated problems. Therehad been the problem of trying to win Ashleys love and trying to keep a dozen other beauxdangling and unhappy. There had been small breaches of conduct to be concealed from her elders,jealous girls to be flouted or placated, styles of dresses and materials to be chosen, differentcoiffures to be tried and, oh, so many, many other matters to be decided! Now life was soamazingly simple. Now all that mattered was food enough to keep off starvation, clothing enoughto prevent freezing and a roof overhead which did not leak too much.

It was during these days that Scarlett dreamed and dreamed again the nightmare which was tohaunt her for years. It was always the same dream, the details never varied, but the terror of itmounted each time it came to her and the fear of experiencing it again troubled even her wakinghours. She remembered so well the incidents of the day when she had first dreamed it.

Cold rain had fallen for days and the house was chill with drafts and dampness. The logs in thefireplace were wet and smoky and gave little heat. There had been nothing to eat except milk sincebreakfast, for the yams were exhausted and Porks snares and fishlines had yielded nothing. One ofthe shoats would have to be killed the next day if they were to eat at all. Strained and hungry faces,black and white, were staring at her, mutely asking her to provide food. She would have to risklosing the horse and send Pork out to buy something. And to make matters worse, Wade was illwith a sore throat and a raging fever and there was neither doctor nor medicine for him.

Hungry, weary with watching her child, Scarlett left him to Melanies care for a while and laydown on her bed to nap. Her feet icy, she twisted and turned, unable to sleep, weighed down withfear and despair. Again and again, she thought: What shall I do? Where shall I turn? Isnt thereanybody in the world who can help me? Where had all the security of the world gone? Whywasnt there someone, some strong wise person to take the burdens from her? She wasnt made tocarry them. She did not know how to carry them. And then she fell into an uneasy doze.

She was in a wild strange country so thick with swirling mist she could not see her hand beforeher face. The earth beneath her feet was uneasy. It was a haunted land, still with a terrible stillness,and she was lost in it, lost and terrified as a child in the night. She was bitterly cold and hungry andso fearful of what lurked in the mists about her that she tried to scream and could not. There werethings in the fog reaching out fingers to pluck at her skirt, to drag her down into the uneasyquaking earth on which she stood, silent, relentless, spectral hands. Then, she knew thatsomewhere in the opaque gloom about her there was shelter, help, a heaven of refuge and warmth.

But where was it? Could she reach it before the hands clutched her and dragged her down into thequicksands?

Suddenly she was running, running through the mist like a mad thing, crying and screaming,throwing out her arms to clutch only empty air and wet mist Where was the haven? It eluded herbut it was there, hidden, somewhere. If she could only reach it! If she could only reach it shewould be safe! But terror was weakening her legs, hunger making her faint. She gave onedespairing cry and awoke to find Melanies worried face above her and Melanies hand shaking herto wakefulness.

The dream returned again and again, whenever she went to sleep with an empty stomach. Andthat was frequently enough. It so frightened her that she feared to sleep, although she feverishlytold herself there was nothing in such a dream to be afraid of. There was nothing in a dream aboutfog to scare her so. Nothing at allyet the thought of dropping off into that mist-filled country soterrified her she began sleeping with Melanie, who would wake her up when her moaning andtwitching revealed that she was again in the clutch of the dream.

Under the strain she grew white and thin. The pretty roundness left her face, throwing her cheekbones into prominence, emphasizing her slanting green eyes and giving her the look of a prowling,hungry cat.

Daytime is enough like a nightmare without my dreaming things, she thought desperately andbegan hoarding her daily ration to eat it just before she went to sleep.

At Christmas time Frank Kennedy and a small troop from the commissary department jogged upto Tara on a futile hunt for grain and animals for the army. They were a ragged and ruffianlyappearing crew, mounted on lame and heaving horses which obviously were in too bad conditionto be used for more active service. Like their animals the men had been invalided out of the frontlineforces and, except for Frank, all of them had an arm missing or an eye gone or stiffened joints.

Most of them wore blue overcoats of captured Yankees and, for a brief instant of horror, those atTara thought Shermans men had returned.

They stayed the night on the plantation, sleeping on the floor in the parlor, luxuriating as theystretched themselves on the velvet rug, for it had been weeks since they had slept under a roof oron anything softer than pine needles and hard earth. For all their dirty beards and tatters they werea well-bred crowd, full of pleasant small talk, jokes and compliments and very glad to be spendingChristmas Eve in a big house, surrounded by pretty women as they had been accustomed to do indays long past. They refused to be serious about the war, told outrageous lies to make the girlslaugh and brought to the bare and looted house the first lightness, the first hint of festivity it hadknown in many a day.

Its almost like the old days when we had house parties, isnt it? whispered Suellen happily toScarlett. Suellen was raised to the skies by having a beau of her own in the house again and shecould hardly take her eyes off Frank Kennedy. Scarlett was surprised to see that Suellen could bealmost pretty, despite the thinness which had persisted since her illness. Her cheeks were flushedand there was a soft luminous look in her eyes.

She really must care about him, thought Scarlett in contempt. And I guess shed be almosthuman if she ever had a husband of her own, even if her husband was old fuss-budget Frank.

Carreen had brightened a little too, and some of the sleep-walking look left her eyes that night.

She had found that one of the men had known Brent Tarleton and had been with him the day hewas killed, and she promised herself a long private talk with him after supper.

At supper Melanie surprised them all by forcing herself out of her timidity and being almostvivacious. She laughed and joked and almost but not quite coquetted with a one-eyed soldier whogladly repaid her efforts with extravagant gallantries. Scarlett knew the effort this involved bothmentally and physically, for Melanie suffered torments of shyness in the presence of anythingmale. Moreover she was far from well. She insisted she was strong and did more work even thanDilcey but Scarlett knew she was sick. When she lifted things her face went white and she had away of sitting down suddenly after exertions, as if her legs would no longer support her. Buttonight she, like Suellen and Carreen, was doing everything possible to make the soldiers enjoytheir Christmas Eve. Scarlett alone took no pleasure in the guests.

The troop had added their ration of parched corn and side meat to the supper of dried peas,stewed dried apples and peanuts which Mammy set before them and they declared it was the bestmeal they had had in months. Scarlett watched them eat and she was uneasy. She not onlybegrudged them every mouthful they ate but she was on tenterhooks lest they discover somehowthat Pork had slaughtered one of the shoats the day before. It now hung in the pantry and she hadgrimly promised her household that she would scratch out the eyes of anyone who mentioned theshoat to their guests or the presence of the dead pigs sisters and brothers, safe in their pen in the swamp. These hungry men could devour the whole shoat at one meal and, if they knew of the livehogs, they could commandeer them for the army. She was alarmed, too, for the cow and the horseand wished they were hidden in the swamp, instead of tied in the woods at the bottom of thepasture. If the commissary took her stock, Tara could not possibly live through the winter. Therewould be no way of replacing them. As to what this army would eat, she did not care. Let the armyfeed the armyif it could. It was hard enough for her to feed her own.

The men added as dessert some ramrod rolls from their knapsacks, and this was the first timeScarlett had ever seen this Confederate article of diet about which there were almost as many jokesas about lice. They were charred spirals of what appeared to be wood. The men dared her to take abite and, when she did, she discovered that beneath the smoke-blackened surface was unsaltedcorn bread. The soldiers mixed their ration of corn meal with water, and salt too when they couldget it, wrapped the thick paste about their ramrods and roasted the mess over camp fires. It was ashard as rock candy and as tasteless as sawdust and after one bite Scarlett hastily handed it backamid roars of laughter. She met Melanies eyes and the same thought was plain in both faces. ...

How can they go on fighting if they have only this stuff to eat?

The meal was gay enough and even Gerald, presiding absently at the head of the table, managedto evoke from the back of his dim mind some of the manner of a host and an uncertain smile. Themen talked, the women smiled and flatteredbut Scarlett turning suddenly to Frank Kennedy toask him news of Miss Pittypat, caught an expression on his face which made her forget what sheintended to say.

His eyes had left Suellens and were wandering about the room, to Geralds childlike puzzledeyes, to the floor, bare of rugs, to the mantelpiece denuded of its ornaments, the sagging springsand torn upholstery into which Yankee bayonets had ripped, the cracked mirror above the sideboard,the unfaded squares on the wall where pictures had hung before the looters came, the scanttable service, the decently mended but old dresses of the girls, the flour sack which had been madeinto a kilt for Wade.

Frank was remembering the Tara he had known before the war and on his face was a hurt look, alook of tired impotent anger. He loved Suellen, liked her sisters, respected Gerald and had agenuine fondness for the plantation. Since Sherman had swept through Georgia, Frank had seenmany appalling sights as he rode about the state trying to collect supplies, but nothing had gone tohis heart as Tara did now. He wanted to do something for the OHaras, especially Suellen, andthere was nothing he could do. He was unconsciously wagging his whiskered head in pity andclicking his tongue against his teeth when Scarlett caught his eye. He saw the flame of indignantpride in them and he dropped his gaze quickly to his plate in embarrassment.

The girls were hungry for news. There had been no mail service since Atlanta fell, now fourmonths past, and they were in complete ignorance as to where the Yankees were, how theConfederate Army was faring, what had happened to Atlanta and to old friends. Frank, whose worktook him all over the section, was as good as a newspaper, better even, for he was kin to or knewalmost everyone from Macon north to Atlanta, and he could supply bits of interesting personalgossip which the papers always omitted. To cover his embarrassment at being caught by Scarlett,he plunged hastily into a recital of news. The Confederates, he told them, had retaken Atlanta afterSherman marched out, but it was a valueless prize as Sherman had burned it completely.

But I thought Atlanta burned the night I left, cried Scarlett, bewildered. I thought our boysburned it!

Oh, no, Miss Scarlett! cried Frank, shocked. Wed never burn one of our own towns with ourown folks in it! What you saw burning was the warehouses and the supplies we didnt want theYankees to capture and the foundries and the ammunition. But that was all. When Sherman tookthe town the houses and stores were standing there as pretty as you please. And he quartered hismen in them.

But what happened to the people? Did hedid he kill them?

He killed somebut not with bullets, said the one-eyed soldier grimly. Soons he marchedinto Atlanta he told the mayor that all the people in town would have to move out, every livingsoul. And there were plenty of old folks that couldnt stand the trip and sick folks that ought not tohave been moved and ladies who werewell, ladies who hadnt ought to be moved either. And hemoved them out in the biggest rainstorm you ever saw, hundreds and hundreds of them, anddumped them in the woods near Rough and Ready and sent word to General Hood to come and getthem. And a plenty of the folks died of pneumonia and not being able to stand that sort of treatment.

Oh, but why did he do that? They couldnt have done him any harm, cried Melanie.

He said he wanted the town to rest his men and horses in, said Frank. And he rested themthere till the middle of November and then he lit out. And he set fire to the whole town when heleft and burned everything.

Oh, surely not everything! cried the girls in dismay.

It was inconceivable that the bustling town they knew, so full of people, so crowded withsoldiers, was gone. All the lovely homes beneath shady trees, all the big stores and the fine hotelssurely they couldnt be gone! Melanie seemed ready to burst into tears, for she had been bornthere and knew no other home. Scarletts heart sank because she had come to love the place secondonly to Tara.

Well, almost everything, Frank amended hastily, disturbed by the expressions on their faces.

He tried to look cheerful, for he did not believe in upsetting ladies. Upset ladies always upset himand made him feel helpless. He could not bring himself to tell them the worst. Let them find outfrom some one else.

He could not tell them what the army saw when it marched back into Atlanta, the acres and acresof chimneys standing blackly above ashes, piles of half-burned rubbish and tumbled heaps of brickclogging the streets, old trees dying from fire, their charred limbs tumbling to the ground in thecold wind. He remembered how the sight had turned him sick, remembered the bitter curses of theConfederates when they saw the remains of the town. He hoped the ladies would never hear of thehorrors of the looted cemetery, for theyd never get over that. Charlie Hamilton and Melaniesmother and father were buried there. The sight of that cemetery still gave Frank nightmares.

Hoping to find jewelry buried with the dead, the Yankee soldiers had broken open vaults, dug upgraves. They had robbed the bodies, stripped from the coffins gold and silver name plates, silvertrimmings and silver handles. The skeletons and corpses, flung helter-skelter among their splintered caskets, lay exposed and so pitiful.

And Frank couldnt tell them about the dogs and the cats. Ladies set such a store by pets. But thethousands of starving animals, left homeless when their masters had been so rudely evacuated, hadshocked him almost as much as the cemetery, for Frank loved cats and dogs. The animals had beenfrightened, cold, ravenous, wild as forest creatures, the strong attacking the weak, the weak waitingfor the weaker to die so they could eat them. And, above the ruined town, the buzzards splotchedthe wintry sky with graceful, sinister bodies.

Frank cast about in his mind for some mitigating information that would make the ladies feelbetter.

Theres some houses still standing, he said, houses that set on big lots away from otherhouses and didnt catch fire. And the churches and the Masonic hall are left And a few stores too.

But the business section and all along the railroad tracks and at Five Pointswell, ladies, that partof town is flat on the ground.

Then, cried Scarlett-bitterly, that warehouse Charlie left me, down on the tracks, its gonetoo?

If it was near the tracks, its gone, but Suddenly he smiled. Why hadnt he thought of itbefore? Cheer up, ladies! Your Aunt Pittys house is still standing. Its kind of damaged but thereit is.

Oh, how did it escape?

Well, its made of brick and its got about the only slate roof in Atlanta and that kept the sparksfrom setting it afire, I guess. And then its about the last house on the north end of town and the firewasnt so bad over that way. Of course, the Yankees quartered there tore it up aplenty. They evenburned the baseboard and the mahogany stair rail for firewood, but shucks! Its in good shape.

When I saw Miss Pitty last week in Macon

You saw her? How is she?

Just fine. Just fine. When I told her her house was still standing, she made up her mind to comehome right away. That isif that old darky, Peter, will let her come. Lots of the Atlanta peoplehave already come back, because they got nervous about Macon. Sherman didnt take Macon buteverybody is afraid Wilsons raiders will get there soon and hes worse than Sherman.

But how silly of them to come back if there arent any houses! Where do they live?

Miss Scarlett, theyre living in tents and shacks and log cabins and doubling up six and sevenfamilies in the few houses still standing. And theyre trying to rebuild. Now, Miss Scarlett, dontsay they are silly. You know Atlanta folks as well as I do. They are plumb set on that town, most asbad as Charlestonians are about Charleston, and itll take more than Yankees and a burning to keepthem away. Atlanta folks arebegging your pardon, Miss Mellyas stubborn as mules aboutAtlanta. I dont know why, for I always thought that town a mighty pushy, impudent sort of place.

But then, Im a countryman born and I dont like any town. And let me tell you, the ones who aregetting back first are the smart ones. The ones who come back last wont find a stick or stone orbrick of their houses, because everybodys out salvaging things all over town to rebuild their houses. Just day before yesterday, I saw Mrs. Merriwether and Miss Maybelle and their old darkywoman out collecting brick in a wheelbarrow. And Mrs. Meade told me she was thinking aboutbuilding a log cabin when the doctor comes back to help her. She said she lived in a log cabinwhen she first came to Atlanta, when it was Marthasville, and it wouldnt bother her none to do itagain. Course, she was only joking but that shows you how they feel about it.

I think theyve got a lot of spirit, said Melanie proudly. Dont you, Scarlett?

Scarlett nodded, a grim pleasure and pride in her adopted town filling her. As Frank said, it wasa pushy, impudent place and that was why she liked it. It wasnt hidebound and stick-in-themuddishlike the older towns and it had a brash exuberance that matched her own. Im likeAtlanta, she thought. It takes more than Yankees or a burning to keep me down.

If Aunt Pitty is going back to Atlanta, wed better go back and stay with her, Scarlett, saidMelanie, interrupting her train of thought. Shell die of fright alone.

Now, how can I leave here, Melly? Scarlett asked crossly. If you are so anxious to go, go. Iwont stop you.

Oh, I didnt mean it that way, darling, cried Melanie, flushing with distress. How thoughtlessof me! Of course, you cant leave Tara andand I guess Uncle Peter and Cookie can take care ofAuntie.

Theres nothing to keep you from going, Scarlett pointed out, shortly.

You know I wouldnt leave you, answered Melanie. And II would be just frightened todeath without you.

Suit yourself. Besides, you wouldnt catch me going back to Atlanta. Just as soon as they get afew houses up, Sherman will come back and burn it again.

He wont be back, said Frank and, despite his efforts, his face drooped. Hes gone on throughthe state to the coast. Savannah was captured this week and they say the Yankees are going on upinto South Carolina.

Savannah taken!

Yes. Why, ladies, Savannah couldnt help but fall. They didnt have enough men to hold it,though they used every man they could getevery man who could drag one foot after another. Doyou know that when the Yankees were marching on Milledgeville, they called out all the cadetsfrom the military academies, matter how young they were, and even opened the state penitentiarytogetfreshtroops?Ye(no) s, sir, they turned loose every convict who was willing to fightand promised him a pardon if he lived through the war. It kind of gave me the creeps to see thoselittle cadets in the ranks with thieves and cutthroats.

They turned loose the convicts on us!

Now, Miss Scarlett, dont you get upset. Theyre a long way off from here, and furthermoretheyre making good soldiers. I guess being a thief dont keep a man from being a good soldier,does it?

I think its wonderful, said Melanie softly.

Well, I dont, said Scarlett flatly. Theres thieves enough running around the country anyway,what with the Yankees and She caught herself in time but the men laughed.

What with Yankees and our commissary department, they finished and she flushed.

But wheres General Hoods army? interposed Melanie hastily. Surely he could have heldSavannah.

Why, Miss Melanie, Frank was startled and reproachful, General Hood hasnt been down inthat section at all. Hes been fighting up in Tennessee, trying to draw the Yankees out of Georgia.

And didnt his little scheme work well! cried Scarlett sarcastically. He left the damn Yankeesto go through us with nothing but schoolboys and convicts and Home Guards to protect us.

Daughter, said Gerald rousing himself, you are profane. Your mother will be grieved.

They are damn Yankees! cried Scarlett passionately. And I never expect to call themanything else.

At the mention of Ellen everyone felt queer and conversation suddenly ceased. Melanie againinterposed.

When you were in Macon did you see India and Honey Wilkes? Did theyhad they heardanything of Ashley?

Now, Miss Melly, you know if Id had news of Ashley, Id have ridden up here from Maconright away to tell you, said Frank reproachfully. No, they didnt have any news butnow, dontyou fret about Ashley, Miss Melly. I know its been a long time since you heard from him, but youcant expect to hear from a fellow when hes in prison, can you? And things arent as bad inYankee prisons as they are in ours. After all, the Yankees have plenty to eat and enough medicinesand blankets. They arent like we arenot having enough to feed ourselves, much less ourprisoners.

Oh, the Yankees have got plenty, cried Melanie, passionately bitter. But they dont givethings to the prisoners. You know they dont, Mr. Kennedy. You are just saying that to make mefeel better. You know that our boys freeze to death up there and starve too and die without doctorsand medicine, simply because the Yankees hate us so much! Oh, if we could just wipe everyYankee off the face of the earth! Oh, I know that Ashley is

Dont say it! cried Scarlett, her heart in her throat. As long as no one said Ashley was dead,there persisted in her heart a faint hope that he lived, but she felt that if she heard the wordspronounced, in that moment he would die.

Now, Mrs. Wilkes, dont you bother about your husband, said the one-eyed man soothingly. Iwas captured after first Manassas and exchanged later and when I was in prison, they fed me offthe fat of the land, fried chicken and hot biscuits

I think you are a liar, said Melanie with a faint smile and the first sign of spirit Scarlett hadever seen her display with a man. What do you think?

I think so too, said the one-eyed man and slapped his leg with a laugh.

If youll all come into the parlor, Ill sing you some Christmas carols, said Melanie, glad to change the subject. The piano was one thing the Yankees couldnt carry away. Is it terribly out oftune, Suellen?

Dreadfully, answered Suellen, happily beckoning with a smile to Frank.

But as they all passed from the room, Frank hung back, tugging at Scarletts sleeve.

May I speak to you alone?

For an awful moment she feared he was going to ask about her livestock and she braced herselffor a good lie.

When the room was cleared and they stood by the fire, all the false cheerfulness which hadcolored Franks face in front of the others passed and she saw that he looked like an old man. Hisface was as dried and brown as the leaves that were blowing about the lawn of Tara and his ginger-colored whiskers were thin and scraggly and streaked with gray. He clawed at them absently andcleared his throat in an annoying way before he spoke.

Im mighty sorry about your ma, Miss Scarlett.

Please dont talk about it.

And your pa Has he been this way since?

Yesheshes not himself, as you can see.

He sure set a store by her.

Oh, Mr. Kennedy, please dont lets talk

Im sorry, Miss Scarlett, and he shuffled his feet nervously. The truth is I wanted to take upsomething with your pa and now I see it wont do any good.

Perhaps I can help you, Mr. Kennedy. You seeIm the head of the house now.

Well, I, began Frank and again clawed nervously at his beard. The truth is Well, MissScarlett, I was aiming to ask him for Miss Suellen.

Do you mean to tell me, cried Scarlett in amused amazement, that you havent yet asked Pafor Suellen? And youve been courting her for years!

He flushed and grinned embarrassedly and in general looked like a shy and sheepish boy.

Well, II didnt know if shed have me. Im so much older than she is andthere were somany good-looking young bucks hanging around Tara

Hump! thought Scarlett, they were hanging around me, not her!

And I dont know yet if shell have me. Ive never asked her but she must know how I feel. II thought Id ask Mr. OHaras permission and tell him the truth. Miss Scarlett, I havent got a centnow. I used to have a lot of money, if youll forgive me mentioning it, but right now all I own ismy horse and the clothes Ive got on. You see, when I enlisted I sold most of my land and I put allmy money in Confederate bonds and you know what theyre worth now. Less than the papertheyre printed on. And anyway, I havent got them now, because they burned up when the Yankeesburned my sisters house. I know Ive got gall asking for Miss Suellen now when I havent a cent butwell, its this way. I got to thinking that we dont know how things are going to turn outabout this war. It sure looks like the end of the world for me. Theres nothing we can be sure of andand I thought it would be a heap of comfort to me and maybe to her if we were engaged. Thatwould be something sure. I wouldnt ask to marry her till I could take care of her, Miss Scarlett,and I dont know when that will be. But if true love carries any weight with you, you can becertain Miss Suellen will be rich in that if nothing else.

He spoke the last words with a simple dignity that touched Scarlett, even in her amusement. Itwas beyond her comprehension that anyone could love Suellen. Her sister seemed to her a monsterof selfishness, of complaints and of what she could only describe as pure cussedness.

Why, Mr. Kennedy, she said kindly, its quite all right. Im sure I can speak for Pa. He alwaysset a store by you and he always expected Suellen to marry you.

Did he now? cried Frank, happiness in his face.

Indeed yes, answered Scarlett, concealing a grin as she remembered how frequently Geraldhad rudely bellowed across the supper table to Suellen: How now, Missy! Hasnt your ardent beaupopped the question yet? Shall I be asking him his intentions?

I shall ask her tonight, he said, his face quivering, and he clutched her hand and shook it.

Youre so kind, Miss Scarlett.

Ill send her to you, smiled Scarlett, starting for the parlor. Melanie was beginning to play.

The piano was sadly out of tune but some of the chords were musical and Melanie was raising hervoice to lead the others in Hark, the Herald Angels Sing!

Scarlett paused. It did not seem possible that war had swept over them twice, that they wereliving in a ravaged country, close to the border of starvation, when this old sweet Christmas hymnwas being sung. Abruptly she turned to Frank.

What did you mean when you said it looked like the end of the world to you?

Ill talk frankly, he said slowly, but I wouldnt want you to be alarming the other ladies withwhat I say. The war cant go on much longer. There arent any fresh men to fill the ranks and thedesertions are running highhigher than the army likes to admit You see, the men cant stand tobe away from their families when they know theyre starving, so they go home to try to provide forthem. I cant blame them but it weakens the army. And the army cant fight without food and thereisnt any food. I know because, you see, getting food is my business. Ive been all up and downthis section since we retook Atlanta and there isnt enough to feed a jaybird. Its the same way forthree hundred miles south to Savannah. The folks are starving and the railroads are torn up andthere arent any new rifles and the ammunition is giving out and theres no leather at all forshoes. ... So, you see, the end is almost here.

But the fading hopes of the Confederacy weighed less heavily on Scarlett than his remark aboutthe scarcity of food. It had been her intention to send Pork out with the horse and wagon, the goldpieces and the United States money to scour the countryside for provisions and material forclothes. But if what Frank said was trueBut Macon hadnt fallen. There must be food in Macon. Just as soon as the commissary department was safely on its way, shed start Pork for Macon and take the chance of having theprecious horse picked up by the army. Shed have to risk it.

Well, lets dont talk about unpleasant things tonight, Mr. Kennedy, she said. You go and sitin Mothers little office and Ill send Suellen to you so you canwell, so youll have a littleprivacy.

Blushing, smiling, Frank slipped out of the room and Scarlett watched him go.

What a pity he cant marry her now, she thought. That would be one less mouth to feed.

Chapter 29

THE FOLLOWING APRIL General Johnston, who had been given back the shattered remnantsof his old command, surrendered them in North Carolina and the war was over. But not until twoweeks later did the news reach Tara. There was too much to do at Tara for anyone to waste timetraveling abroad and hearing gossip and, as the neighbors were just as busy as they, there was littlevisiting and news spread slowly.

Spring plowing was at its height and the cotton and garden seed Pork had brought from Maconwas being put into the ground. Pork had been almost worthless since the trip, so proud was he ofreturning safely with his wagon-load of dress goods, seed, fowls, hams, side meat and meal. Overand over, he told the story of, his many narrow escapes, of the bypaths and country lanes he hadtaken on his return to Tara, the unfrequented roads, the old trails, the bridle paths. He had been fiveweeks on the road, agonizing weeks for Scarlett. But she did not upbraid him on his return, for shewas happy that he had made the trip successfully and pleased that he brought back so much of themoney she had given him. She had a shrewd suspicion that the reason he had so much money leftover was that he had not bought the fowls or most of the food. Pork would have taken shame tohimself had he spent her money when there were unguarded hen coops along the road andsmokehouses handy.

Now that they had a little food, everyone at Tara was busy trying to restore some semblance ofnaturalness to life. There was work for every pair of hands, too much work, never-ending work.

The withered stalks of last years cotton had to be removed to make way for this years seeds andthe balky horse, unaccustomed to the plow, dragged unwillingly through the fields. Weeds had tobe pulled from the garden and the seeds planted, firewood had to be cut, a beginning had to bemade toward replacing the pens and the miles and miles of fences so casually burned by theYankees. The snares Pork set for rabbits had to be visited twice a day and the fishlines in the riverrebaited. There were beds to be made and floors to be swept, food to be cooked and dishes washed,hogs and chickens to be fed and eggs gathered. The cow had to be milked and pastured near theswamp and someone had to watch her all day for fear the Yankees or Frank Kennedys men wouldreturn and take her. Even little Wade had his duties. Every morning he went out importantly with abasket to pick up twigs and chips to start the fires with.

It was the Fontaine boys, the first of the County men home from the war, who brought the newsof the surrender. Alex, who still had boots, was walking and Tony, barefooted, was riding on thebare back of a mule. Tony always managed to get the best of things in that family. They were swarthier than ever from four years exposure to sun and storm, thinner, more wiry, and the wildblack beards they brought back from the war made them seem like strangers.

On their way to Mimosa and eager for home, they only stopped a moment at Tara to kiss thegirls and give them news of the surrender. It was all over, they said, all finished, and they did notseem to care much or want to talk about it. All they wanted to know was whether Mimosa hadbeen burned. On the way south from Atlanta, they had passed chimney after chimney where thehomes of friends had stood and it seemed almost too much to hope that their own house had beenspared. They sighed with relief at the welcome news and laughed, slapping their thighs whenScarlett told them of Sallys wild ride and how neatly she had cleared their hedge.

Shes a spunky girl, said Tony, and its rotten luck for her, Joe getting killed. You all got anychewing tobacco, Scarlett?

Nothing but rabbit tobacco. Pa smokes it in a corn cob.

I havent fallen that low yet, said Tony, but Ill probably come to it.

Is Dimity Munroe all right? asked Alex, eagerly but a little embarrassed, and Scarlett recalledvaguely that he had been sweet on Sallys younger sister.

Oh, yes. Shes living with her aunt over in Fayetteville now. You know their house in Lovejoywas burned. And the rest of her folks are in Macon.

What he means ishas Dimity married some brave colonel in the Home Guard? jeered Tony,and Alex turned furious eyes upon him.

Of course, she isnt married, said Scarlett, amused.

Maybe it would be better if she had, said Alex gloomily. How the hellI beg your pardon,Scarlett. But how can a man ask a girl to marry him when his darkies are all freed and his, stockgone and he hasnt got a cent in his pockets?

You know that wouldnt bother Dimity, said Scarlett. She could afford to be loyal to Dimityand say nice things about her, for Alex Fontaine had never been one of her own beaux.

Hells afire Well, I beg your pardon again. Ill have to quit swearing or Grandma will suretan my hide. Im not asking any girl to marry a pauper. It mightnt bother her but it would botherme.

While Scarlett talked to the boys on the front porch, Melanie, Suellen and Carreen slippedsilently into the house as soon as they heard the news of the surrender. After the boys had gone,cutting across the back fields of Tara toward home, Scarlett went inside and heard the girls sobbingtogether on the sofa in Ellens little office. It was all over, the bright beautiful dream they hadloved and hoped for, the Cause which had taken their friends, lovers, husbands and beggared theirfamilies. The Cause they had thought could never fall had fallen forever.

But for Scarlett, there were no tears. In the first moment when she heard the news she thought:

Thank God! Now the cow wont be stolen. Now the horse is safe. Now we can take the silver outof the well and everybody can have a knife and fork. Now I wont be afraid to drive round thecountry looking for something to eat.

What a relief! Never again would she start in fear at the sound of hooves. Never again would shewake in the dark nights, holding her breath to listen, wondering if it were reality or only a dreamthat she heard in the yard the rattle of bits, the stamping of hooves and the harsh crying of ordersby the Yankees. And, best of all, Tara was safe! Now her worst nightmare would never come true.

Now she would never have to stand on the lawn and see smoke billowing from the beloved houseand hear the roar of flames as the roof fell in.

Yes, the Cause was dead but war had always seemed foolish to her and peace was better. Shehad never stood starry eyed when the Stars and Bars ran up a pole or felt cold chills when Dixie

sounded. She had not been sustained through privations, the sickening duties of nursing, the fearsof the siege and the hunger of the last few months by the fanatic glow which made all these thingsendurable to others, if only the Cause prospered. It was all over and done with and she was notgoing to cry about it.

All over! The war which had seemed so endless, the war which, unbidden and unwanted, hadcut her life in two, had made so clean a cleavage that it was difficult to remember those other care-tree days. She could look back, unmoved, at the pretty Scarlett with her fragile green moroccoslippers and her flounces fragrant with lavender but she wondered if she could be that same girl.

Scarlett OHara, with the County at her feet, a hundred slaves to do her bidding, the wealth of Taralike a wall behind her and doting parents anxious to grant any desire of her heart. Spoiled, carelessScarlett who had never known an ungratified wish except where Ashley was concerned.

Somewhere, on the long road that wound through those four years, the girl with her sachet anddancing slippers had slipped away and there was left a woman with sharp green eyes, who countedpennies and turned her hands to many menial tasks, a woman to whom nothing was left from thewreckage except the indestructible red earth on which she stood.

As she stood in the hall, listening to the girls sobbing, her mind was busy.

Well plant more cotton, lots more. Ill send Pork to Macon tomorrow to buy more seed. Nowthe Yankees wont burn it and our troops wont need it Good Lord! Cotton ought to go sky highthis fall!

She went into the little office and, disregarding the weeping girls on the sofa, seated herself atthe secretary and picked up a quill to balance the cost of more cotton seed against her remainingcash.

The war is over, she thought and suddenly she dropped the quill as a wild happiness floodedher. The war was over and Ashleyif Ashley was alive hed be coming home! She wondered ifMelanie, in the midst of mourning for the lost Cause, had thought of this.

Soon well get a letterno, not a letter. We cant get letters. But soonoh, somehow hell letus know!

But the days passed into weeks and there was no news from Ashley. The mail service in theSouth was uncertain and in the rural districts there was none at all. Occasionally a passing travelerfrom Atlanta brought a note from Aunt Pitty tearfully begging the girls to come back. But nevernews of Ashley.

After the surrender, an ever-present feud over the horse smoldered between Scarlett and Suellen.

Now that there was no danger of Yankees, Suellen wanted to go calling on the neighbors. Lonelyand missing the happy sociability of the old days, Suellen longed to visit friends, if for no otherreason than to assure herself that the rest of the County was as bad off as Tara. But Scarlett wasadamant. The horse was for work, to drag logs from the woods, to plow and for Pork to ride insearch of food. On Sundays he had earned the right to graze in the pasture and rest. If Suellenwanted to go visiting she could go afoot.

Before the last year Suellen had never walked a hundred yards in her life and this prospect wasanything but pleasing: So she stayed at home and nagged and cried and said, once too often: Oh,if only Mother was here! At that, Scarlett gave her the long-promised slap, hitting her so hard itknocked her screaming to the bed and caused great consternation throughout the house. Thereafter,Suellen whined the less, at least in Scarletts presence.

Scarlett spoke truthfully when she said she wanted the horse to rest but that was only half of thetruth. The other half was that she had paid one round of calls on the County in the first month afterthe surrender and the sight of old friends and old plantations had shaken her courage more than sheliked to admit.

The Fontaines had fared best of any, thanks to Sallys hard ride, but it was flourishing only bycomparison with the desperate situation of the other neighbors. Grandma Fontaine had nevercompletely recovered from the heart attack she had the day she led the others in beating out theflames and saving the house. Old Dr. Fontaine was convalescing slowly from an amputated arm.

Alex and Tony were turning awkward hands to plows and hoe handles. They leaned over the fencerail to shake hands with Scarlett when she called and they laughed at her rickety wagon, their blackeyes bitter, for they were laughing at themselves as well as her. She asked to buy seed corn fromthem and they promised it and fell to discussing farm problems. They had twelve chickens, twocows, five hogs and the mule they brought home from the war. One of the hogs had just died andthey were worried about losing the others. At bearing such serious words about hogs from theseex-dandies who had given life more serious thought than which cravat was most fashionable, Scarlett laughed (never) and this time (a) her laugh was bitter too.

They had all made her welcome at Mimosa and had insisted on giving, not selling, her the seedcorn. The quick Fontaine tempers flared when she put a greenback on the table and they flatlyrefused payment. Scarlett took the corn and privately slipped a dollar bill into Sallys hand. Sallylooked like a different person from the girl who had greeted her eight months before when Scarlettfirst came home to Tara. Then she had been pale and sad but there had been a buoyancy about her.

Now that buoyancy had gone, as if the surrender had taken all hope from her.

Scarlett, she whispered as she clutched the bill, what was the good of it all? Why did we everfight? Oh, my poor Joe! Oh, my poor baby!

I dont know why we fought and I dont care, said Scarlett, And Im not interested. I neverwas interested. War is a mans business, not a womans. All Im interested in now is a good cottoncrop. Now take this dollar and buy little Joe a dress. God knows, he needs it. Im not going to robyou of your corn, for all Alex and Tonys politeness.

The boys followed her to the wagon and assisted her in, courtly for all their rags, gay with the volatile Fontaine gaiety, but with the picture of their destitution in her eyes, she shivered as shedrove away from Mimosa. She was so tired of poverty and pinching. What a pleasure it would beto know people who were rich and not worried as to where the next meal was coming from!

Cade Calvert was at home at Pine Bloom and, as Scarlett came up the steps of the old house inwhich she had danced so often in happier days, she saw that death was in his face. He wasemaciated and he coughed as he lay in an easy chair in the sunshine with a shawl across his knees,but his face lit up when he saw her. Just a little cold which had settled in his chest, he said, tryingto rise to greet her. Got it from sleeping so much in the rain. But it would be gone soon and thenhed lend a hand in the work.

Cathleen Calvert, who came out of the house at the sound of voices, met Scarletts eyes aboveher brothers head and in them Scarlett read knowledge and bitter despair. Cade might not knowbut Cathleen knew. Pine Bloom looked straggly and overgrown with weeds, seedling pines werebeginning to show in the fields and the house was sagging and untidy. Cathleen was thin and taut.

The two of them, with their Yankee stepmother, their four little half-sisters, and Hilton, theYankee overseer, remained in the silent, oddly echoing house. Scarlett had never liked Hilton anymore than she liked their own overseer Jonas Wilkerson, and she liked him even less now, as hesauntered forward and greeted her like an equal. Formerly he had the same combination ofservility and impertinence which Wilkerson possessed but now, with Mr. Calvert and Raiford deadin the war and Cade sick, he had dropped all servility. The second Mrs. Calvert had never knownhow to compel respect from negro servants and it was not to be expected that she could get it froma white man.

Mr. Hilton has been so kind about staying with us through these difficult times, said Mrs.

Calvert nervously, casting quick glances at her silent stepdaughter. Very kind. I suppose you heardhow he saved our house twice when Sherman was here. Im sure I dont know how we would havemanaged without him, with no money and Cade

A flush went over Cades white face and Cathleens long lashes veiled her eyes as her mouthhardened. Scarlett knew their souls were writhing in helpless rage at being under obligations totheir Yankee overseer. Mrs. Calvert seemed ready to weep. She had somehow made a blunder. Shewas always blundering. She just couldnt understand Southerners, for all that she had lived inGeorgia twenty years. She never knew what not to say to her stepchildren and, no matter what shesaid or did, they were always so exquisitely polite to her. Silently she vowed she would go Northto her own people, taking her children with her, and leave these puzzling stiff-necked strangers.

After these visits, Scarlett had no desire to see the Tarletons. Now that the four boys were gone,the house burned and the family cramped in the overseers cottage, she could not bring herself togo. But Suellen and Carreen begged and Melanie said it would be unneighborly not to call andwelcome Mr. Tarleton back from the war, so one Sunday they went.

This was the worst of all.

As they drove up by the ruins of the house, they saw Beatrice Tarleton dressed in a worn ridinghabit, a crop under her arm, sitting on the top rail of the fence about the paddock, staring moodilyat nothing. Beside her perched the bow-legged little negro who had trained her horses and he looked as glum as his mistress. The paddock, once full of frolicking colts and placid brood mares,was empty now except for one mule, the mule Mr. Tarleton had ridden home from the surrender.

I swear I dont know what to do with myself now that my darlings are gone, said Mrs.

Tarleton, climbing down from the fence. A stranger might have thought she spoke of her four deadsons, but the girls from Tara knew her horses were in her mind. All my beautiful horses dead. Andoh, my poor Nellie! If I just had Nellie! And nothing but a damned mule on the place. A damnedmule, she repeated, looking indignantly at the scrawny beast. Its an insult to the memory of myblooded darlings to have a mule in their paddock. Mules are misbegotten, unnatural critters and itought to be illegal to breed them.

Jim Tarleton, completely disguised by a bushy beard, came out of the overseers house towelcome and kiss the girls and his four red-haired daughters in mended dresses streamed outbehind him, tripping over the dozen black and tan hounds which ran barking to the door at thesound of strange voices. There was an air of studied and determined cheerfulness about the wholefamily which brought a colder chill to Scarletts bones than the bitterness of Mimosa or the deathlybrooding of Pine Bloom.

The Tarletons insisted that the girls stay for dinner, saying they had so few guests these days andwanted to hear all the news. Scarlett did not want to linger, for the atmosphere oppressed her, butMelanie and her two sisters were anxious for a longer visit, so the four stayed for dinner and atesparingly of the side meat and dried peas which were served them.

There laughter about the skimpy fare and the Tarleton girls giggled as they told ofmakeshiftsfo(was) r clothes, as if they were telling the most amusing of jokes. Melanie met themhalfway, surprising Scarlett with her unexpected vivacity as she told of trials at Tara, making lightof hardships. Scarlett could hardly speak at all. The room seemed so empty without the four greatTarleton boys, lounging and smoking and teasing. And if it seemed empty to her, what must itseem to the Tarletons who were offering a smiling front to their neighbors?

Carreen had said little during the meal but when it was over she slipped over to Mrs. Tarletonsside and whispered something. Mrs. Tarletons face changed and the brittle smile left her lips asshe put her arm around Carreens slender waist. They left the room, and Scarlett, who felt shecould not endure the house another minute, followed them. They went down the path through thegarden and Scarlett saw they were going toward the burying ground. Well, she couldnt go back tothe house now. It would seem too rude. But what on earth did Carreen mean dragging Mrs.

Tarleton out to the boys graves when Beatrice was trying so hard to be brave?

There were two new marble markers in the brick-enclosed lot under the funereal cedarssonew that no rain had splashed them with red dust.

We got them last week, said Mrs. Tarleton proudly. Mr. Tarleton went to Macon and broughtthem home in the wagon.

Tombstones! And what they must have cost! Suddenly Scarlett did not feel as sorry for theTarletons as she had at first. Anybody who would waste precious money on tombstones when foodwas so dear, so almost unattainable, didnt deserve sympathy. And there were several lines carvedon each of the stones. The more carving, the more money. The whole family must be crazy! And it had cost money, too, to bring the three boys bodies home. They had never found Boyd or anytrace of him.

Between the graves of Brent and Stuart was a stone which read: They were lovely and pleasantin their lives, and in their death they were not divided.

On the other stone were the names of Boyd and Tom with something in Latin which beganDulce et but it meant nothing to Scarlett who had managed to evade Latin at the FayettevilleAcademy.

All that money for tombstones! Why, they were fools! She felt as indignant as if her own moneyhad been squandered.

Carreens eyes were shining oddly.

I think its lovely, she whispered pointing to the first stone.

Carreen would think it lovely. Anything sentimental stirred her.

Yes, said Mrs. Tarleton and her voice was soft, we thought it very fittingthey died almostat the same time. Stuart first and then Brent who caught up the flag he dropped.

As the girls drove back to Tara, Scarlett was silent for a while, thinking of what she had seen inthe various homes, remembering against her will the County in its glory, with visitors at all the bighouses and money plentiful, negroes crowding the quarters and the well-tended fields gloriouswith cotton.

In another year, therell be little pines all over these fields, she thought and looking toward theencircling forest she shuddered. Without the darkies, it will be all we can do to keep body andsoul together. Nobody can run a big plantation without the darkies, and lots of the fields wont becultivated at all and the woods will take over the fields again. Nobody can plant much cotton, andwhat will we do then? Whatll become of country folks? Town folks can manage somehow.

Theyve always managed. But we country folks will go back a hundred years like the pioneers whohad little cabins and just scratched a few acresand barely existed.

No she thought grimly, Tara isnt going to be like that. Not even if I have to plow myself.

This whole section, this whole state can go back to woods if it wants to, but I wont let Tara go.

And I dont intend to waste my money on tombstones or my time crying about the war. We canmake out somehow. I know we could make out somehow if the men werent all dead. Losing thedarkies isnt the worst part about this. Its the loss of the men, the young men. She thought againof the four Tarletons and Joe Fontaine, of Raiford Calvert and the Munroe brothers and all the boysfrom Fayetteville and Jonesboro whose names she had read on the casualty lists. If there were justenough men left, we could manage somehow but

Another thought struck hersuppose she wanted to marry again. Of course, she didnt want tomarry again. Once was certainly enough. Besides, the only man shed ever wanted was Ashley andhe was married if he was still living. But suppose she would want to marry. Who would there be tomarry her? The thought was appalling.

Melly, she said, whats going to happen to Southern girls?

What do you mean?

Just what I say. Whats going to happen to them? Theres no one to marry them. Why, Melly,with all the boys dead, therell be thousands of girls all over the South wholl die old maids.

And never have any children, added Melanie, to whom this was the most important thing.

Evidently the thought was not new to Suellen who sat in the back of the wagon, for she suddenlybegan to cry. She had not heard from Frank Kennedy since Christmas. She did not know if the lackof mail service was the cause, or if he had merely trifled with her affections and then forgotten her.

Or maybe he had been killed in the last days of the war! The latter would have been infinitelypreferable to his forgetting her, for at least there was some dignity about a dead love, such asCarreen and India Wilkes had, but none about a deserted fiance.

Oh, in the name of God, hush! said Scarlett.

Oh, you talk, sobbed Suellen, because youve been married and had a baby andeverybody knows(can) some man wanted you. But look at me! And youve got to be mean and throw itup to me that Im an old maid when I cant help myself. I think youre hateful.

Oh, hush! You know how I hate people who bawl all the time. You know perfectly well oldGinger Whiskers isnt dead and that hell come back and marry you. He hasnt any better sense.

But personally, Id rather be an old maid than marry him.

There was silence from the back of the wagon for a while and Carreen comforted her sister withabsent-minded pats, for her mind was a long way off, riding paths three years old with BrentTarleton beside her. There was a glow, an exaltation in her eyes.

Ah, said Melanie, sadly, what will the South be like without all our fine boys? What wouldthe South have been if they had lived? We could use their courage and their energy and theirbrains. Scarlett, all of us with little boys must raise them to take the places of the men who aregone, to be brave men like them.

There will never again be men like them, said Carreen softly. No one can take their places.

They drove home the rest of the way in silence.

One day not long after this, Cathleen Calvert rode up to Tara at sunset. Her sidesaddle wasstrapped on as sorry a mule as Scarlett had ever seen, a flop-eared lame brute, and Cathleen wasalmost as sorry looking as the animal she rode. Her dress was of faded gingham of the type onceworn only by house servants, and her sunbonnet was secured under her chin by a piece of twine.

She rode up to the front porch but did not dismount, and Scarlett and Melanie, who had beenwatching the sunset, went down the steps to meet her. Cathleen was as white as Cade had been theday Scarlett called, white and hard and brittle, as if her face would shatter if she spoke. But herback was erect and her head was high as she nodded to them.

Scarlett suddenly remembered the day of the Wilkes barbecue when she and Cathleen hadwhispered together about Rhett Butler. How pretty and fresh Cathleen had been that day in a swirlof blue organdie with fragrant roses at her sash and little black velvet slippers laced about hersmall ankles. And now there was not a trace of that girl in the stiff figure sitting on the mule.

I wont get down, thank you, she said. I just came to tell you that Im going to be married.

What!

Who to?

Cathy, how grand!

When?

Tomorrow, said Cathleen quietly and there was something in her voice which took the eagersmiles from their faces. I came to tell you that Im going to be married tomorrow, in Jonesboroand Im not inviting you all to come.

They digested this in silence, looking up at her, puzzled. Then Melanie spoke.

Is it someone we know, dear?

Yes, said Cathleen, shortly. Its Mr. Hilton.

Mr. Hilton?

Yes, Mr. Hilton, our overseer,

Scarlett could not even find voice to say Oh! but Cathleen, peering down suddenly at Melanie,said in a low savage voice: If you cry, Melly, I cant stand it. I shall die!

Melanie said nothing but patted the foot in its awkward home-made shoe which hung from thestirrup. Her bead was low.

And dont pat me! I cant stand that either.

Melanie dropped her hand but still did not look up.

Well, I must go. I only came to tell you. The white brittle mask was back again and she pickedup the reins.

How is Cade? asked Scarlett, utterly at a loss but fumbling for some words to break theawkward silence.

He is dying, said Cathleen shortly. There seemed to be no feeling in her voice. And he isgoing to die in some comfort and peace if I can manage it, without worry about who will take careof me when hes gone. You see, my stepmother and the children are going North for good,tomorrow. Well, I must be going.

Melanie looked up and met Cathleens hard eyes. There were bright tears on Melanies lashesand understanding in her eyes, and before them, Cathleens lips curved into the crooked smile of abrave child who tries not to cry. It was all very bewildering to Scarlett who was still trying to graspthe idea that Cathleen Calvert was going to marry an overseerCathleen, daughter of a richplanter, Cathleen who, next to Scarlett, had had more beaux than any girl in the County.

Cathleen bent down and Melanie tiptoed. They kissed. Then Cathleen flapped the bridle reinssharply and the old mule moved off.

Melanie looked after her, the tears streaming down her face. Scarlett stared, still dazed.

Melly, is she crazy? You know she cant be in love with him.

In love? Oh, Scarlett, dont even suggest such a horrid thing! Oh, poor Cathleen! Poor Cade!

Fiddle-dee-dee! cried Scarlett, beginning to be irritated. It was annoying that Melanie alwaysseemed to grasp more of situations than she herself did. Cathleens plight seemed to her morestartling than catastrophic. Of course it was no pleasant thought, marrying Yankee white trash, butafter all a girl couldnt live alone on a plantation; she had to have a husband to help her run itMelly, its like I said the other day. There isnt anybody for girls to marry and theyve got tomarry someone.

Oh, they dont have to marry! Theres nothing shameful in being a spinster. Look at Aunt Pitty.

Oh, Id rather see Cathleen dead! I know Cade would rather see her dead. Its the end of theCalverts. Just think what herwhat their children will be. Oh, Scarlett, have Pork saddle the horsequickly and you ride after her and tell her to come live with us!

Good Lord! cried Scarlett, shocked at the matter-of-fact way in which Melanie was offeringTara. Scarlett certainly had no intention of feeding another mouth. She started to say this butsomething in Melanies stricken face halted the words.

She wouldnt come, Melly, she amended. You know she wouldnt. Shes so proud and shedthink it was charity.

Thats true, thats true! said Melanie distractedly, watching the small cloud of red dustdisappear down the road.

Youve been with me for months, thought Scarlett grimly, looking at her sister-in-law, andits never occurred to you that its charity youre living on. And I guess it never will. Youre one ofthose people the war didnt change and you go right on thinking and acting just like nothing hadhappenedlike we were still rich as Croesus and had more food than we know what to do withand guests didnt matter. I guess Ive got you on my neck for the rest of my life. But I wont haveCathleen too.

Chapter 30

IN THAT warm summer after peace came, Tara suddenly lost its isolation. And for monthsthereafter a stream of scarecrows, bearded, ragged, footsore and always hungry, toiled up the redhill to Tara and came to rest on the shady front steps, wanting food and a nights lodging. Theywere Confederate soldiers walking home. The railroad had carried the remains of Johnstons armyfrom North Carolina to Atlanta and dumped them there, and from Atlanta they began theirpilgrimages afoot. When the wave of Johnstons men had passed, the weary veterans from theArmy of Virginia arrived and then men from the Western troops, beating their way south towardhomes which might not exist and families which might be scattered or dead. Most of them werewalking, a few fortunate ones rode bony horses and mules which the terms of the surrender hadpermitted them to keep, gaunt animals which even an untrained eye could tell would never reachfar-away Florida and south Georgia.

Going home! Going home! That was the only thought in the soldiers minds. Some were sad andsilent, others gay and contemptuous of hardships, but the thought that it was all over and they were going home was the one thing that sustained them. Few of them were bitter. They left bitterness totheir women and their old people. They had fought a good fight, had been licked and were willingto settle down peaceably to plowing beneath the flag they had fought.

Going home! Going home! They could talk of nothing else, neither battles nor wounds, norimprisonment nor the future. Later, they would refight battles and tell children and grandchildrenof pranks and forays and charges, of hunger, forced marches and wounds, but not now. Some ofthem lacked an arm or a leg or an eye, many had scars which would ache in rainy weather if theylived for seventy years but these seemed small matters now. Later it would be different.

Old and young, talkative and taciturn, rich planter and sallow Cracker, they all had two things incommon, lice and dysentery. The Confederate soldier was so accustomed to his verminous state hedid not give it a thought and scratched unconcernedly even in the presence of ladies. As fordysenterythe bloody flux as the ladies delicately called itit seemed to have spared no onefrom private to general. Four years of half-starvation, four years of rations which were coarse orgreen or half-putrefied, had done its work with them, and every soldier who stopped at Tara waseither just recovering or was actively suffering from it.

Dey ain a soun set of bowels in de whole Confedrut ahmy, observed Mammy darkly as shesweated over the fire, brewing a bitter concoction of blackberry roots which had been Ellenssovereign remedy for such afflictions. Its mah notion dat twarnt de Yankees whut beat ourgempmum. Twuz dey own innards. Kain no gempmum fight wid his bowels tuhnin ter water.

One and all, Mammy dosed them, never waiting to ask foolish questions about the state of theirorgans and, one and all, they drank her doses meekly and with wry faces, remembering, perhaps,other stern black faces in far-off places and other inexorable black hands holding medicine spoons.

In the matter of compny Mammy was equally adamant. No lice-ridden soldier should comeinto Tara. She marched them behind a clump of thick bushes, relieved them of their uniforms, gavethem a basin of water and strong lye soap to wash with and provided them with quilts and blanketsto cover their nakedness, while she boiled their clothing in her huge wash pot. It was useless forthe girls to argue hotly that such conduct humiliated the soldiers. Mammy replied that the girlswould be a sight more humiliated if they found lice upon themselves.

When the soldiers began arriving almost daily, Mammy protested against their being allowed touse the bedrooms. Always she feared lest some louse had escaped her. Rather than argue thematter, Scarlett turned the parlor with its deep velvet rug into a dormitory. Mammy cried outequally loudly at the sacrilege of soldiers being permitted to sleep on Miss Ellens rug but Scarlettwas firm. They had to sleep somewhere. And, in the months after the surrender, the deep soft napbegan to show signs of wear and finally the heavy warp and woof showed through in spots whereheels had worn it and spurs dug carelessly.

Of each soldier, they asked eagerly of Ashley. Suellen, bridling, always asked news of Mr.

Kennedy. But none of the soldiers had ever heard of them nor were they inclined to talk about themissing. It was enough that they themselves were alive, and they did not care to think of thethousands in unmarked graves who would never come home.

The family tried to bolster Melanies courage after each of these disappointments. Of course, Ashley hadnt died in prison. Some Yankee chaplain would have written if this were true. Ofcourse, he was coming home but his prison was so far away. Why, goodness, it took days riding ona train to make the trip and if Ashley was walking, like these men ... Why hadnt he written? Well,darling, you know what the mails are nowso uncertain and slipshod even where mail routes arere-established. But supposesuppose he had died on the way home. Now, Melanie, some Yankeewoman would have surely written us about it! ... Yankee women! Bah! ... Melly, there are somenice Yankee women. Oh, yes, there are! God couldnt make a whole nation without having somenice women in it! Scarlett, you remember we did meet a nice Yankee woman at Saratoga that timeScarlett, tell Melly about her!

Nice, my foot! replied Scarlett. She asked me how many bloodhounds we kept to chase ourdarkies with! I agree with Melly. I never saw a nice Yankee, male or female. But dont cry, Melly!

Ashleyll come home. Its a long walk and maybemaybe he hasnt got any boots.

Then at the thought of Ashley barefooted, Scarlett could have cried. Let other soldiers limp by inrags with their feet tied up in sacks and strips of carpet, but not Ashley. He should come home on aprancing horse, dressed in fine clothes and shining boots, a plume in his hat. It was the finaldegradation for her to think of Ashley reduced to the state of these other soldiers.

One afternoon in June when everyone at Tara assembled on the back porch eagerly watchingPorkcutthefirsthalf-ripewatermelonofthese(was) ason, they heard hooves on the gravel ofthe front drive. Prissy started languidly toward the front door, while those left behind argued hotlyas to whether they should hide the melon or keep it for supper, should the caller at the door proveto be a soldier.

Melly and Carreen whispered that the soldier guest should have a share and Scarlett, backed bySuellen and Mammy, hissed to Pork to hide it quickly.

Dont be a goose, girls! Theres not enough for us as it is and if there are two or three famishedsoldiers out there, none of us will even get a taste, said Scarlett.

While Pork stood with the little melon clutched to him, uncertain as to the final decision, theyheard Prissy cry out.

Gawdlmighty! Miss Scarlett! Miss Melly! Come quick!

Who is it? cried Scarlett, leaping up from the steps and racing through the hall with Melly ather shoulder and the others streaming after her.

Ashley! she thought Oh, perhapsIts Uncle Peter! Miss Pittypats Uncle Peter!

They all ran out to the front porch and saw the tall grizzled old despot of Aunt Pittys houseclimbing down from a rat-tailed nag on which a section of quilting had been strapped. On his wideblack face, accustomed dignity strove with delight at seeing old friends, with the result that hisbrow was furrowed in a frown but his mouth was hanging open like a happy toothless old hounds.

Everyone ran down the steps to greet him, black and white shaking his hand and askingquestions, but Mellys voice rose above them all.

Auntie isnt sick, is she?

Nom. Shes poly, thank God, answered Peter, fastening a severe look first on Melly and thenon Scarlett, so that they suddenly felt guilty but could think of no reason why. Shes poly but sheis plum outdone wid you young Misses, an ef it come right down to it, Ah is too!

Why, Uncle Peter! What on earth

Yall neen try ter scuse youseffs. Ain Miss Pitty writ you an writ you ter come home? Ain

Ah seed her write an seed her a-cryin wen yall writ her back dat you got too much ter do ondisyere ole farm ter come home?

But, Uncle Peter

Huccome you leave Miss Pitty by herseff lak dis wen she so scary lak? You know wells Ah doMiss Pitty ain never live by herseff an she been shakin in her lil shoes ever since she come backfrum Macom. She say fer me ter tell yall plain as Ah knows how dat she jes kain unnerstan yalldesertin her in her hour of need.

Now, hesh! said Mammy tartly, for it sat ill upon her to hear Tara referred to as an ole farm.

Trust an ignorant city-bred darky not to know the difference between a farm and a plantation.

Ain us got no hours of need? Ain us needin Miss Scarlett an Miss Melly right hyah an needin

dem bad? Huccome Miss Pitty doan ast her brudder fer sistance, does she need any?

Uncle Peter gave her a withering look.

Us ain had nuthin ter do wid Mist Henry fer yars, an us is too ole ter start now. He turnedback to the girls, who were trying to suppress their smiles. You young Misses ought ter tekshame, leavin po Miss Pitty lone, wid half her frens daid an de other half in Macom, an Lantafull of Yankee sojers an trashy free issue niggers.

The two girls had borne the castigation with straight faces as long as they could, but the thoughtof Aunt Pitty sending Peter to scold them and bring them back bodily to Atlanta was too much fortheir control. They burst into laughter and hung on each others shoulders for support. Naturally,Pork and Dilcey and Mammy gave vent to loud guffaws at hearing the detractor of their belovedTara set at naught. Suellen and Carreen giggled and even Geralds face wore a vague smile.

Everyone laughed except Peter, who shifted from one large splayed foot to the other in mountingindignation.

Whuts wrong wid you, nigger? inquired Mammy with a grin. Is you gittin too ole terperteck yo own Missus? Peter was outraged.

Too ole! Me too ole? No, Mam! Ah kin perteck Miss Pitty lak Ah allus done. Ain Ah perteckher down ter Macom when us refugeed? AinAh perteck her wen de Yankees come ter Macom an

she so sceered she faintin all de time? An ain Ah quire disyere nag ter bring her back ter Lantaan perteck her an her pas silver all de way? Peter drew himself to his full height as he vindicatedhimself. Ah ain talkin about perteckin. Ahs talkin bout how it look.

How who look?

Ahm talkin bout how it look ter folks, seein Miss Pitty livin lone. Folks talks scanlous boutmaiden ladies dat lives by deyseff, continued Peter, and it was obvious to his listeners thatPittypat, in his mind, was still a plump and charming miss of sixteen who must be sheltered against evil tongues. An Ah ain figgerin on havin folks criticize her. No, Mam.  An Ah ain

figgerin on her takin in no boders, jes fer compny needer. Ah done tole her dat. Not wile yougot yo flesh an blood dat belongs wid you, Ah says. An now her flesh an blood denyin her.

Miss Pitty ain nuthin but a chile an

At this, Scarlett and Melly whooped louder and sank down to the steps. Finally Melly wipedtears of mirth from her eyes.

Poor Uncle Peter! Im sorry I laughed. Really and truly. There! Do forgive me. Miss Scarlettand I just cant come home now. Maybe Ill come in September after the cotton is picked. DidAuntie send you all the way down here just to bring us back on that bag of bones?

At this question, Peters jaw suddenly dropped and guilt and consternation swept over hiswrinkled black face. His protruding underlip retreated to normal as swiftly as a turtle withdraws itshead beneath its shell.

Miss Melly, Ah is gittin ole, Ah spec, cause Ah clean fergit fer de moment whut she sent mefer, an its important too. Ah got a letter fer you. Miss Pitty wouldn trust de mails or nobody butme ter bring it an

A letter? For me? Who from?

Wellm, itsMiss Pitty, she says ter me, You, Peter, you brek it genly ter Miss Melly, an

Ah say

Melly rose from the steps, her hand at her heart.

Ashley! Ashley! Hes dead!

Nom! Nom! cried Peter, his voice rising to a shrill bawl, as he fumbled in the breast pocketof his ragged coat. Hes live! Disyere a letter frum him. He comin home. He Gawdlmighty!

Ketch her, Mammy! Lemme

Doan you tech her, you ole fool! thundered Mammy, struggling to keep Melanies saggingbody from falling to the ground. You pious black ape! Brek it genly! You, Poke, tek her feet.

Miss Carreen, steady her haid. Lessus lay her on de sofa in de parlor.

There was a tumult of sound as everyone but Scarlett swarmed about the fainting Melanie,everyone crying out in alarm, scurrying into the house for water and pillows, and in a momentScarlett and Uncle Peter were left standing alone on the walk. She stood rooted, unable to movefrom the position to which she had leaped when she heard his words, staring at the old man whostood feebly waving a letter. His old black face was as pitiful as a childs under its mothersdisapproval, his dignity collapsed.

For a moment she could not speak or move, and though her mind shouted: He isnt dead! Hescoming home! the knowledge brought neither joy nor excitement, only a stunned immobility.

Uncle Peters voice came as from a far distance, plaintive, placating.

Mist Willie Burr frum Macom whut is kin ter us, he brung it ter Miss Pitty. Mist Willie he inde same jail house wid Mist Ashley. Mist Willie he got a hawse an he got hyah soon. But Mist

Ashley he a-walkin an

Scarlett snatched the letter from his hand. It was addressed to Melly in Miss Pittys writing butthat did not make her hesitate a moment. She ripped it open and Miss Pittys enclosed note fell tothe ground. Within the envelope there was a piece of folded paper, grimy from the dirty pocket inwhich it had been carried, creased and ragged about the edges. It bore the inscription in Ashleyshand: Mrs. George Ashley Wilkes, Care Miss Sarah Jane Hamilton, Atlanta, or Twelve Oaks,Jonesboro, Ga.

With fingers that shook, she opened it and read:

Beloved, I am coming home to you

Tears began to stream down her face so that she could not read and her heart swelled up untilshe felt she could not bear the joy of it. Clutching the letter to her, she raced up the porch steps anddown the hall, past the parlor where an the inhabitants of Tara were getting in one anothers way asthey worked over the unconscious Melanie, and into Ellens office. She shut the door and locked itand flung herself down on the sagging old sofa crying, laughing, kissing the letter.

Beloved, she whispered, I am coming home to you.

Common sense told them that unless Ashley developed wings, it would be weeks or evenmonths before he could travel from Illinois to Georgia, but hearts nevertheless beat wildlywhenever a soldier turned into the avenue at Tara. Each bearded scarecrow might be Ashley. And ifit were not Ashley, perhaps the soldier would have news of him or a letter from Aunt Pitty abouthim. Black and white, they rushed to the front porch every time they heard footsteps. The sight of auniform was enough to bring everyone flying from the woodpile, the pasture and the cotton patch.

For a month after the letter came, work was almost at a standstill. No one wanted to be out of thehouse when he arrived. Scarlett least of all. And she could not insist on the others attending to theirduties when she so neglected hers.

But when the weeks crawled by and Ashley did not come or any news of him, Tara settled backinto its old routine. Longing hearts could only stand so much of longing. An uneasy fear crept intoScarletts mind that something had happened to him along the way. Rock Island was so far awayand he might have been weak or sick when released from prison. And he had no money and wastramping through a country where Confederates were hated. If only she knew where he was, shewould send money to him, send every penny she had and let the family go hungry, so he couldcome home swiftly on the train.

Beloved, I am coming home to you.

In the first rush of joy when her eyes met those words, they had meant only that Ashley wascoming home to her. Now, in the light of cooler reason, it was Melanie to whom he was returning,Melanie who went about the house these days singing with joy. Occasionally, Scarlett wonderedbitterly why Melanie could not have died in childbirth in Atlanta. That would have made thingsperfect. Then she could have married Ashley after a decent interval and made little Beau a goodstepmother too. When such thoughts came she did not pray hastily to God, telling Him she did notmean it. God did not frighten her any more.

Soldiers came singly and in pairs and dozens and they were always hungry. Scarlett thought despairingly that a plague of locusts would be more welcome. She cursed again the old custom ofhospitality which had flowered in the era of plenty, the custom which would not permit anytraveler, great or humble, to go on his journey without a nights lodging, food for himself and hishorse and the utmost courtesy the house could give. She knew that era had passed forever, but therest of the household did not, nor did the soldiers, and each soldier was welcomed as if he were along-awaited guest.

As the never-ending line went by, her heart hardened. They were eating the food meant for themouths of Tara, vegetables over whose long rows she had wearied her back, food she had drivenendless miles to buy. Food was so hard to get and the money in the Yankees wallet would not lastforever. Only a few greenbacks and the two gold pieces were left now. Why should she feed thishorde of hungry men? The war was over. They would never again stand between her and danger.

So, she gave orders to Pork that when soldiers were in the house, the table should be set sparely.

This order prevailed until she noticed that Melanie, who had never been strong since Beau wasborn, was inducing Pork to put only dabs of food on her plate and giving her share to the soldiers.

Youll have to stop it, Melanie, she scolded. Youre half sick yourself and if you dont eatmore, youll be sick in bed and well have to nurse you. Let these men go hungry. They can standit. Theyve stood it for four years and it wont hurt them to stand it a little while longer.

Melanie turned to her and on her face was the first expression of naked emotion Scarlett hadever seen in those serene eyes.

Oh, Scarlett, dont scold me! Let me do it. You dont know how it helps me. Every time I givesome poor man my share I think that maybe, somewhere on the road up north, some woman isgiving my Ashley a share of her dinner and its helping him to get home to me!

My Ashley.

Beloved, I am coming home to you.

Scarlett turned away, wordless. After that, Melanie noticed there was more food on the tablewhen guests were present, even though Scarlett might grudge them every mouthful.

When the soldiers were too ill to go on, and there were many such, Scarlett put them to bed withnone too good grace. Each sick man meant another mouth to feed. Someone had to nurse him andthat meant one less worker at the business of fence building, hoeing, weeding and plowing. Oneboy, on whose face a blond fuzz had just begun to sprout, was dumped on the front porch by amounted soldier bound for Fayetteville. He had found him unconscious by the roadside and hadbrought him, across his saddle, to Tara, the nearest house. The girls thought he must be one of thelittle cadets who had been called out of military school when Sherman approached Milledgevillebut they never knew, for he died without regaining consciousness and a search of his pocketsyielded no information.

A nice-looking boy, obviously a gentleman, and somewhere to the south, some woman waswatching the roads, wondering where he was and when he was coming home, just as she andMelanie, with a wild hope in their hearts, watched every bearded figure that came up their walk.

They buried the cadet in the family burying ground, next to the three little OHara boys, andMelanie cried sharply as Pork filled in the grave, wondering in her heart if strangers were doing this same thing to the tall body of Ashley.

Will Benteen was another soldier, like the nameless boy, who arrived unconscious across thesaddle of a comrade. Will was acutely ill with pneumonia and when the girls put him to bed, theyfeared he would soon join the boy in the burying ground.

He had the sallow malarial face of the south Georgia Cracker, pale pinkish hair and washed-outblue eyes which even in delirium were patient and mild. One of his legs was gone at the knee andto the stump was fitted a roughly whittled wooden peg. He was obviously a Cracker, just as theboy they had buried so short a while ago was obviously a planters son. Just how the girls knewthis they could not say. Certainly Will was no dirtier, no more hairy, no more lice infested thanmany fine gentlemen who came to Tara. Certainly the language he used in his delirium was no lessgrammatical than that of the Tarleton twins. But they knew instinctively, as they knewthoroughbred horses from scrubs, that he was not of their class. But this knowledge did not keepthem from laboring to save him.

Emaciated from a year in a Yankee prison, exhausted by his long tramp on his ill-fitting woodenpeg, he had little strength to combat pneumonia and for days he lay in the bed moaning, trying toget up, fighting battles over again. Never once did he call for mother, wife, sister or sweetheart andthis omission worried Carreen.

A man ought to have some folks, she said. And he sounds like he didnt have a soul in theworld.

For all his lankiness he was tough, and good nursing pulled him through. The day came whenhis pale blue eyes, perfectly cognizant of his surroundings, fell upon Carreen sitting beside him,telling her rosary beads, the morning sun shining through her fair hair.

Then you warnt a dream, after all, he said, in his flat toneless voice. I hope I aint troubledyou too much, Mam.

His convalescence was a long one and he lay quietly looking out of the window at the magnoliasand causing very little trouble to anyone. Carreen liked him because of his placid andunembarrassed silences. She would sit beside him through the long hot afternoons, fanning himand saying nothing.

Carreen had very little to say these days as she moved, delicate and wraithlike, about the taskswhich were within her strength. She prayed a good deal, for when Scarlett came into her roomwithout knocking, she always found her on her knees by her bed. The sight never failed to annoyher, for Scarlett felt that the time for prayer had passed. If God had seen fit to punish them so, thenGod could very well do without prayers. Religion had always been a bargaining process withScarlett. She promised God good behavior in exchange for favors. God had broken the bargaintime and again, to her way of thinking, and she felt that she owed Him nothing at all now. Andwhenever she found Carreen on her knees when she should have been taking an afternoon nap ordoing the mending, she felt that Carreen was shirking her share of the burdens.

She said as much to Will Benteen one afternoon when he was able to sit up in a chair and wasstartled when he said in his flat voice: Let her be, Miss Scarlett. It comforts her.

Comforts her?

Yes, shes prayin for your ma and him.

Who is him?

His faded blue eyes looked at her from under sandy lashes without surprise. Nothing seemed tosurprise or excite him. Perhaps he had seen too much of the unexpected ever to be startled again.

That Scarlett did not know what was in her sisters heart did not seem odd to him. He took it asnaturally as he did the fact that Carreen had found comfort in talking to him, a stranger.

Her beau, that boy Brent something-or-other who was killed at Gettysburg.

Her beau? said Scarlett shortly. Her beau, nothing! He and his brother were my beaux.

Yes, so she told me. Looks like most of the County was your beaux. But, all the same, he washer beau after you turned him down, because when he come home on his last furlough they gotengaged. She said he was the only boy shed ever cared about and so it kind of comforts her topray for him.

Well, fiddle-dee-dee! said Scarlett, a very small dart of jealousy entering her.

She looked curiously at this lanky man with his bony stooped shoulders, his pinkish hair andcalm unwavering eyes. So he knew things about her own family which she had not troubled todiscover. So that was why Carreen mooned about, praying all the time. Well, shed get over it. Lotsof girls got over dead sweethearts, yes, dead husbands, too. Shed certainly gotten over Charles.

And she knew one girl in Atlanta who had been widowed three times by the war and was still ableto take notice of men. She said as much to Will but he shook his head.

Not Miss Carreen, he said with finality.

Will was pleasant to talk to because he had so little to say and yet was so understanding alistener. She told him about her problems of weeding and hoeing and planting, of fattening thehogs and breeding the cow, and he gave good advice for he had owned a small farm in southGeorgia and two negroes. He knew his slaves were free now and the farm gone to weeds andseedling pines. His sister, his only relative, had moved to Texas with her husband years ago and hewas alone in the world. Yet, none of these things seemed to bother him any more than the leg hehad left in Virginia.

Yes, Will was a comfort to Scarlett after hard days when the negroes muttered and Suellennagged and cried and Gerald asked too frequently where Ellen was. She could tell Will anything.

She even told him of killing the Yankee and glowed with pride when he commented briefly: Goodwork!

Eventually all the family found their way to Wills room to air their troubleseven Mammy,who had at first been distant with him because he was not quality and had owned only two slaves.

When he was able to totter about the house, he turned his hands to weaving baskets of split oakand mending the furniture ruined by the Yankees. He was clever at whittling and Wade wasconstantly by his side, for he whittled out toys for him, the only toys the little boy had. With Willin the house, everyone felt safe in leaving Wade and the two babies while they went about theirtasks, for he could care for them as deftly as Mammy and only Melly surpassed him at soothing thescreaming black and white babies.

Youve been mighty good to me, Miss Scarlett, he said, and me a stranger and nothin to youall. Ive caused you a heap of trouble and worry and if its all the same to you, Im goin to stayhere and help you all with the work till Ive paid you back some for your trouble. I cant ever payit all, cause there aint no payment a man can give for his life.

So he stayed and, gradually, unobtrusively, a large part of the burden of Tara shifted fromScarletts shoulders to the bony shoulders of Will Benteen.

It was September and time to pick the cotton. Will Benteen sat on the front steps at Scarlettsfeet in the pleasant sunshine of the. early autumn afternoon and his flat voice went on and onlanguidly about the exorbitant costs of ginning the cotton at the new gin near Fayetteville. However,he had learned that day in Fayetteville that he could cut this expense a fourth by lending thehorse and wagon for two weeks to the gin owner. He had delayed closing the bargain until hediscussed it with Scarlett.

She looked at the lank figure leaning against the porch column, chewing a straw. Undoubtedly,as Mammy frequently declared, Will was something the Lord had provided and Scarlett oftenwondered how Tara could have lived through the last few months without him. He never had muchto say, never displayed any energy, never seemed to take much interest in anything that went onabout him, but he knew everything about everybody at Tara. And he did things. He did themsilently, patiently and competently. Though he had only one leg, he could work faster than Pork.

And he could get work out of Pork, which was, to Scarlett, a marvelous thing. When the cow hadthe colic and the horse fell ill with mysterious ailment which threatened to remove him permanently fromthem,Willsatupnight(a) s with them and saved them. That he was a shrewd traderbrought him Scarletts respect, for he could ride out in the mornings with a bushel or two of apples,sweet potatoes and other vegetables and return with seeds, lengths of cloth, flour and other necessitieswhich she knew she could never have acquired, good trader though she was.

He had gradually slipped into the status of a member of the family and slept on a cot in the littledressing room off Geralds room. He said nothing of leaving Tara, and Scarlett was careful not toquestion him, fearful that he might leave them. Sometimes, she thought that if he were anybodyand had any gumption he would go home, even if he no longer had a home. But even with thisthought, she would pray fervently that he would remain indefinitely. It was so convenient to have aman about the house.

She thought, too, that if Carreen had the sense of a mouse she would see that Will cared for her.

Scarlett would have been eternally grateful to Will, had he asked her for Carreens hand. Of course,before the war, Will would certainly not have been an eligible suitor. He was not of the planterclass at all, though he was not poor white. He was just plain Cracker, a small farmer, half-educated,prone to grammatical and ignorant of of the finer the OHaras were accustomedtoingentlemen.I(errors) nfact,Scarlettwondered(some) ifhecouldbecalleda(manners) gentleman at all anddecided that he couldnt. Melanie hotly defended him, saying that anyone who had Wills kindheart and thoughtfulness of others was of gentle birth. Scarlett knew that Ellen would have faintedat the thought of a daughter of hers marrying such a man, but now Scarlett had been by necessityforced too far away from Ellens teachings to let that worry her. Men were scarce, girls had to marry someone and Tara had to have a man. But Carreen, deeper and deeper immersed in herprayer book and every day losing more of her touch with the world of realities, treated Will asgently as a brother and took him as much for granted as she did Pork.

If Carreen had any sense of gratitude to me for what Ive done for her, shed marry him and notlet him get away from here, Scarlett thought indignantly. But no, she must spend her timemooning about a silly boy who probably never gave her a serious thought.

So Will remained at Tara, for what reason she did not know and she found his businesslike man-to-man attitude with her both pleasant and helpful. He was gravely deferential to the vague Geraldbut it was to Scarlett that he turned as the real head of the house.

She gave her approval to the plan of hiring out the horse even though it meant the family wouldbe without any means of transportation temporarily. Suellen would be especially grieved at this.

Her greatest joy lay in going to Jonesboro or Fayetteville with Will when he drove over onbusiness. Adorned in the assembled best of the family, she called on old friends, heard all thegossip of the County and felt herself again Miss OHara of Tara. Suellen never missed theopportunity to leave the plantation and give herself airs among people who did not know sheweeded the garden and made beds.

Miss Fine Airs will just have to do without gadding for two weeks, thought Scarlett, and wellhave to put up with her nagging and her bawling.

Melanie joined them on the veranda, the baby in her arms, and spreading an old blanket on thefloor, set little Beau down to crawl. Since Ashleys letter Melanie had divided her time betweenglowing, singing happiness and anxious longing. But happy or depressed, she was too thin, toowhite. She did her share of the work uncomplainingly but she was always ailing. Old Dr. Fontainediagnosed her trouble as female complaint and concurred with Dr. Meade in saying she shouldnever have had Beau. And he said frankly that another baby would kill her.

When I was over to Fayetteville today, said Will, I found somethin right cute that I thoughtwould interest you ladies and I brought it home. He fumbled in his back pants pocket and broughtout the wallet of calico, stiffened with bark, which Carreen had made him. From it, he drew aConfederate bill.

If you think Confederate money is cute, Will, I certainly dont, said Scarlett shortly, for thevery sight of Confederate money made her mad. Weve got three thousand dollars of it in Pastrunk this minute, and Mammys after me to let her paste it over the holes in the attic walls so thedraft wont get her. And I think Ill do it. Then itll be good for something.

Imperious Caesar, dead and turned to clay,  said Melanie with a sad smile. Dont do that,Scarlett. Keep it for Wade. Hell be proud of it some day.

Well, I dont know nothin about imperious Caesar, said Will, patiently, but what Ive got isin line with what youve just said about Wade, Miss Melly. Its a poem, pasted on the back of thisbill. I know Miss Scarlett aint much on poems but I thought this might interest her.

He turned the bill over. On its back was pasted a strip of coarse brown wrapping paper, inscribedin pale homemade ink. Will cleared his throat and read slowly and with difficulty.

The name is Lines on the Back of a Confederate Note,  he said.

RepresentingnothingonGodsearthnowAndnaughtinthewatersbelowitAsthepledgeofnationthatspassedawayKeepit,dearfriend,andshow it.

Show ittothosewho willllendanearTo thetalethistriflewillltelllOfLiberty,bornofpatriotsdream,Ofastorm-cradlednationthatfelll.

Oh, how beautiful! How touching! cried Melanie. Scarlett, you mustnt give the money toMammy to paste in the attic. Its more than paperjust like this poem said: The pledge of anation thats passed away!

Oh, Melly, dont be sentimental! Paper is paper and weve got little enough of it and Im tiredof hearing Mammy grumble about the cracks in the attic. I hope when Wade grows up Ill haveplenty of greenbacks to give him instead of Confederate trash.

Will, who had been enticing little Beau across the blanket with the bill during this argument,looked up and, shading his eyes, glanced down the driveway.

More company, he said, squinting in the sun. Another soldier.

Scarlett followed his gaze and saw a familiar sight, a bearded man coming slowly up the avenueunder the cedars, a man clad in a ragged mixture of blue and gray uniforms, head bowed tiredly,feet dragging slowly.

I thought we were about through with soldiers, she said. I hope this one isnt very hungry.

Hell be hungry, said Will briefly.

Melanie rose.

Id better tell Dilcey to set an extra plate, she said, and warn Mammy not to get the poorthings clothes off his back too abruptly and

She stopped so suddenly that Scarlett turned to look at her. Melanies thin hand was at herthroat, clutching it as if it was torn with pain, and Scarlett could see the veins beneath the whiteskin throbbing swiftly. Her face went whiter and her brown eyes dilated enormously.

Shes going to faint, thought Scarlett, leaping to her feet and catching her arm.

But, in an instant, Melanie threw off her hand and was down the steps. Down the graveled pathshe flew, skimming lightly as a bird, her faded skirts streaming behind her, her arms outstretched.

Then, Scarlett knew the truth, with the impact of a blow. She reeled back against an upright of theporch as the man lifted a face covered with a dirty blond beard and stopped still, looking towardthe house as if he was too weary to take another step. Her heart leaped and stopped and then beganracing, as Melly with incoherent cries threw herself into the dirty soldiers arms and his head bent down toward hers. With rapture, Scarlett took two running steps forward but was checked whenWills hand closed upon her skirt.

Dont spoil it, he said quietly.

Turn me loose, you fool! Turn me loose! Its Ashley!

He did not relax his grip.

After all, hes her husband, aint he? Will asked calmly and, looking down at him in aconfusion of joy and impotent fury, Scarlett saw in the quiet depths of his eyes understanding andpity.

Chapter 31

ON A COLD January afternoon in 1866, Scarlett sat in the office writing a letter to Aunt Pitty,explaining in detail for the tenth time why neither she, Melanie nor Ashley could come back toAtlanta to live with her. She wrote impatiently because she knew Aunt Pitty would read no fartherthan the opening lines and then write her again, wailing: But Im afraid to live by myself!

Her hands were chilled and she paused to rub them together and to scuff her feet deeper into thestrip of old quilting wrapped about them. The soles of her slippers were practically gone and werereinforced with pieces of carpet. The carpet kept her feet off the floor but did little to keep themwarm. That morning Will had taken the horse to Jonesboro to get him shod. Scarlett thoughtgrimly that things were indeed at a pretty pass when horses had shoes and peoples feet were asbare as yard dogs.

She picked up her quill to resume her writing but laid it down when she heard Will coming in atthe back door. She heard the thump-thump of his wooden leg in the hall outside the office and thenhe stopped. She waited for a moment for him to enter and when he made no move she called tohim. He came in, his ears red from the cold, his pinkish hair awry, and stood looking down at her, afaintly humorous smile on his lips.

Miss Scarlett, he questioned, just how much cash money have you got?

Are you going to try to marry me for my money, Will? she asked somewhat crossly.

No, Mam. But I just wanted to know.

She stared at him inquiringly. Will didnt look serious, but then he never looked serious.

However, she felt that something was wrong.

Ive got ten dollars in gold, she said. The last of that Yankees money.

Well, Mam, that wont be enough.

Enough for what?

Enough for the taxes, he answered and, stumping over to the fireplace, he leaned down andheld his red hands to the blaze.

Taxes? she repeated. Name of God, Will! Weve already paid the taxes.

Yesm. But they say you didnt pay enough. I heard about it today over to Jonesboro.

But, Will, I cant understand. What do you mean?

Miss Scarlett, I sure hate to bother you with more trouble when youve had your share but Ivegot to tell you. They say you ought to paid lots more taxes than you did. Theyre runnin theassessment up on Tara sky highhigher than any in the County, Ill be bound.

But they cant make us pay more taxes when weve already paid them once.

Miss Scarlett, you dont never go to Jonesboro often and Im glad you dont. It aint no placefor a lady these days. But if youd been there much, youd know theres a mighty rough bunch ofScallawags and Republicans and Carpetbaggers been runnin things recently. Theyd make youmad enough to pop. And then, too, niggers pushin white folks off the sidewalks and

But whats that got to do with our taxes?

Im gettin to it, Miss Scarlett. For some reason the rascals have histed the taxes on Tara tillyoud think it was a thousand-bale place. After I heard about it, I sorter oozed around the barroomspickin up gossip and I found out that somebody wants to buy in Tara cheap at the sheriffs sale, ifyou cant pay the extra taxes. And everybody knows pretty well that you cant pay them. I dontknow yet who it is wants this place. I couldnt find out. But I think that pusillanimous feller,Hilton, that married Miss Cathleen knows, because he laughed kind of nasty when I tried to soundhim out.

Will sat down on the sofa and rubbed the stump of his leg. It ached in cold weather and thewooden peg was neither well padded nor comfortable. Scarlett looked at him wildly. His mannerwas so casual when he was sounding the death knell of Tara. Sold out at the sheriffs sale? Wherewould they all go? And Tara belonging to some one else! No, that was unthinkable!

She had been so engrossed with the job of making Tara produce she had paid little heed to whatwas going on in the world outside. Now that she had Will and Ashley to attend to whateverbusiness she might have in Jonesboro and Fayetteville, she seldom left the plantation. And even asshe had listened with deaf ears to her fathers war talk in the days before the war came, so she hadpaid little heed to Will and Ashleys discussions around the table after supper about the beginningsof Reconstruction.

Oh, of course, she knew about the ScalawagsSoutherners who had turned Republican veryprofitablyand the Carpetbaggers, those Yankees who came South like buzzards after thesurrender with all their worldly possessions in one carpetbag. And she had had a few unpleasantexperiences with the Freedmens Bureau. She had gathered, also, that some of the free negroeswere getting quite insolent. This last she could hardly believe, for she had never seen an insolentnegro in her life.

But there were many things which Will and Ashley had conspired to keep from her. The scourgeof war had been followed by the worse scourge of Reconstruction, but the two men had agreed notto mention the more alarming details when they discussed the situation at home. And when Scarletttook the trouble to listen to them at all, most of what they said went in one ear and out the other.

She had heard Ashley say that the South was being treated as a conquered province and thatvindictiveness was the dominant policy of the conquerors. But that was the kind of statementwhich meant less than nothing at all to Scarlett. Politics was mens business. She had heard Willsay it looked to him like the North just wasnt aiming to let the South get on its feet again. Well,thought Scarlett, men always had to have something foolish to worry about. As far as she wasconcerned, the Yankees hadnt whipped her once and they wouldnt do it this time. The thing to dowas to work like the devil and stop worrying about the Yankee government. After all, the war wasover.

Scarlett did not realize that all the rules of the game had been changed and that honest laborcould no longer earn its just reward. Georgia was virtually under martial law now. The Yankeesoldiers garrisoned throughout the section and the Freedmens Bureau were in complete commandof everything and they were fixing the rules to suit themselves.

This Bureau, organized by the Federal government to take care of the idle and excited ex-slaves,was drawing them from the plantations into the villages and cities by the thousands. The Bureaufed them while they loafed and poisoned their minds against their former owners. Geralds oldoverseer, Jonas Wilkerson, was in charge of the local Bureau, and his assistant was Hilton,Cathleen Calverts husband. These two industriously spread the rumor that the Southerners andDemocrats were just waiting for a good chance to put the negroes back into slavery and that thenegroes only hope of escaping this fate was the protection given them by the Bureau and theRepublican party.

Wilkerson and Hilton furthermore told the negroes they were as good as the whites in every wayand soon white and negro marriages would be permitted, soon the estates of their former ownerswould be divided and every negro would be given forty acres and a mule for his own. They keptthe negroes stirred up with tales of cruelty perpetrated by the whites and, in a section long famedfor the affectionate relations between slaves and slave owners, hate and suspicion began to grow.

The Bureau was backed up by the soldiers and the military had issued many and conflictingorders governing the conduct of the conquered. It was easy to get arrested, even for snubbing theofficials of the Bureau. Military orders had been promulgated concerning the schools, sanitation,the kind of buttons one wore on ones suit, the sale of commodities and nearly everything else.

Wilkerson and Hilton had the power to interfere in any trade Scarlett might make and to fix theirown prices on anything she sold or swapped.

Fortunately Scarlett had come into contact with the two men very little, for Will had persuadedher to let him handle the trading while she managed the plantation. In his mild-tempered way, Willhad straightened out several difficulties of this kind and said nothing to her about them. Will couldget along with Carpetbaggers and Yankeesif he had to. But now a problem had arisen which wastoo big for him to handle. The extra tax assessment and the danger of losing Tara were mattersScarlett had to know aboutand right away.

She looked at him with flashing eyes.

Oh, damn the Yankees! she cried. Isnt it enough that theyve licked us and beggared uswithout turning loose scoundrels on us?

The war was over, peace had been declared, but the Yankees could still rob her, they could stillstarve her, they could still drive her from her house. And fool that she was, she had thoughtthrough weary months that if she could just hold out until spring, everything would be all right.

This crushing news brought by Will, coming on top of a year of back-breaking work and hopedeferred, was the last straw.

Oh, Will, and I thought our troubles were all over when the war ended!

Nom. Will raised his lantern-jawed, country-looking face and gave her a long steady look.

Our troubles are just gettin started.

How much extra taxes do they want us to pay?

Three hundred dollars.

She was struck dumb for a moment. Three hundred dollars! It might just as well be three milliondollars.

Why, she floundered, whywhy, then weve got to raise three hundred, somehow.

Yesmadd a rainbow and a moon or two.

Oh, but Will! They couldnt sell out Tara. Why

His mild pale eyes showed more hate and bitterness than she thought possible.

Oh, couldnt they? Well, they could and they will and theyll like doin it! Miss Scarlett, thecountrys gone plumb to hell, if youll pardon me. Those Carpetbaggers and Scalawags can voteand most of us Democrats cant. Cant no Democrat in this state vote if he was on the tax books formore than two thousand dollars in sixty-five. That lets out folks like your pa and Mr. Tarleton andthe McRaes and the Fontaine boys. Cant nobody vote who was a colonel and over in the war and,Miss Scarlett, I bet this states got more colonels than any state in the Confederacy. And cantnobody vote who held office under the Confederate government and that lets out everybody fromthe notaries to the judges, and the woods are full of folks like that. Fact is, the way the Yankeeshave framed up that amnesty oath, cant nobody who was somebody before the war vote at all. Notthe smart folks nor the quality folks nor the rich folks.

Huh! I could vote if I took their damned oath. I didnt have any money in sixty-five and Icertainly warnt a colonel or nothin remarkable. But I aint goin to take their oath. Not by adinged sight! If the Yankees had acted right, Id have taken their oath of allegiance but I aint now.

I can be restored to the Union but I cant be reconstructed into it. I aint goin to take their oatheven if I dont never vote again But scum like that Hilton feller, he can vote, and scoundrels likeJonas Wilkerson and pore whites like the Slatterys and no-counts like the Macintoshes, they canvote. And theyre runnin things now. And if they want to come down on you for extra taxes adozen times, they can do it. Just like a nigger can kill a white man and not get hung or Hepaused, embarrassed, and the memory of what had happened to a lone white woman on an isolatedfarm near Lovejoy was in both their minds. ... Those niggers can do anything against us and theFreedmens Bureau and the soldiers will back them up with guns and we cant vote or do nothin

about it.

Vote! she cried. Vote! What on earth has voting got to do with all this, Will? Its taxes were talking about. ... Will, everybody knows what a good plantation Tara is. We could mortgage it forenough to pay the taxes, if we had to.

Miss Scarlett, you aint any fool but sometimes you talk like one. Whos got any money to lendyou on this property? Who except the Carpetbaggers who are tryin to take Tara away from you?

Why, everybodys got land. Everybodys land pore. You cant give away land.

Ive got those diamond earbobs I got off that Yankee. We could sell them.

Miss Scarlett, who round here has got money for ear-bobs? Folks aint got money to buy sidemeat, let alone gewgaws. If youve got ten dollars in gold, I take oath thats more than most folkshave got.

They were silent again and Scarlett felt as if she were butting her head against a stone wall.

There had been so many stone walls to butt against this last year.

What are we goin to do, Miss Scarlett?

I dont know, she said dully and felt that she didnt care. This was one stone wall too manyand she suddenly felt so tired that her bones ached. Why should she work and struggle and wearherself out? At the end of every struggle it seemed that defeat was waiting to mock her.

I dont know, she said. But dont let Pa know. It might worry him.

I wont.

Have you told anyone?

No, I came right to you.

Yes, she thought, everyone always came right to her with bad news and she was tired of it.

Where is Mr. Wilkes? Perhaps hell have some suggestion.

Will turned his mild gaze on her and she felt, as from the first day when Ashley came home, thathe knew everything.

Hes down in the orchard splittin rails. I heard his axe when I was puttin up the horse. But heaint got any money any more than we have.

If I want to talk to him about it, I can, cant I? she snapped, rising to her feet and kicking thefragment of quilting from her ankles.

Will did not take offense but continued rubbing his hands before the flame. Better get yourshawl, Miss Scarlett. Its raw outside.

But she went without the shawl, for it was upstairs and her need to see Ashley and lay hertroubles before him was too urgent to wait.

How lucky for her if she could find him alone! Never once since his return had she had a privateword with him. Always the family clustered about him, always Melanie was by his side, touchinghis sleeve now and again to reassure herself he was really there. The sight of that happy possessivegesture had aroused in Scarlett all the jealous animosity which had slumbered during the monthswhen she had thought Ashley probably dead. Now she was determined to see him alone. This timeno one was going to prevent her from talking with him alone.

She went through the orchard under the bare boughs and the damp weeds beneath them wet herfeet. She could hear the sound of the axe ringing as Ashley split into rails the logs hauled from theswamp. Replacing the fences the Yankees had so blithely burned was a long hard task. Everythingwas a long hard task, she thought wearily, and she was tired of it, tired and mad and sick of it all. Ifonly Ashley were her husband, instead of Melanies, how sweet it would be to go to him and layher head upon his shoulder and cry and shove her burdens onto him to work out as best he might.

She rounded a thicket of pomegranate trees which were shaking bare limbs in the cold wind andsaw him leaning on his axe, wiping his forehead with the back of his hand. He was wearing theremains of his butternut trousers and one of Geralds shirts, a shirt which in better times went onlyto Court days and barbecues, a ruffled shirt which was far too short for its present owner. He hadhung his coat on a tree limb, for the work was hot, and he stood resting as she came up to him.

At the sight of Ashley in rags, with an axe in his hand, her heart went out in a surge of love andof fury at fate. She could not bear to see him in tatters, working, her debonair immaculate Ashley.

His hands were not made for work or his body for anything but broadcloth and fine linen. Godintended him to sit in a great house, talking with pleasant people, playing the piano and writingthings which sounded beautiful and made no sense whatsoever.

She could endure the sight of her own child in aprons made of sacking and the girls in dingy oldgingham, could bear it that Will worked harder than any field hand, but not Ashley. He was toofine for all this, too infinitely dear to her. She would rather split logs herself than suffer while hedid it.

They say Abe Lincoln got his start splitting rails, he said as she came up to him. Just think towhat heights I may climb!

She frowned. He was always saying light things like this about their hardships. They weredeadly serious matters to her and sometimes she was almost irritated at his remarks.

Abruptly she told him Wills news, tersely and in short words, feeling a sense of relief as shespoke. Surely, hed have something helpful to offer. He said nothing but, seeing her shiver, he tookhis coat and placed it about her shoulders.

Well, she said finally, doesnt it occur to you that well have to get the money somewhere?

Yes, he said, but where?

Im asking you, she replied, annoyed. The sense of relief at unburdening herself haddisappeared. Even if he couldnt help, why didnt he say something comforting, even if it wasonly: Oh, Im so sorry.

He smiled.

In all these months since Ive been home Ive only heard of one person, Rhett Butler, whoactually has money, he said.

Aunt Pittypat had written Melanie the week before that Rhett was back in Atlanta with acarriage and two fine horses and pocketfuls of greenbacks. She had intimated, however, that hedidnt come by them honestly. Aunt Pitty had a theory, largely shared by Atlanta, that Rhett had managed to get away with the mythical millions of the Confederate treasury.

Dont lets talk about him, said Scarlett shortly. Hes a skunk if ever there was one. Whats tobecome of us all?

Ashley put down the axe and looked away and his eyes seemed to be journeying to some far-offcountry where she could not follow.

I wonder, he said. I wonder not only what will become of us at Tara but what will become ofeverybody in the South.

She felt like snapping out abruptly: To hell with everybody in the South! What about us? butshe remained silent because the tired feeling was back on her more strongly than ever. Ashleywasnt being any help at all.

In the end what will happen will be what has happened whenever a civilization breaks up. Thepeople who have brains and courage come through and the ones who havent are winnowed out. Atleast, it has been interesting, if not comfortable, to witness a G.tterd.mmerung.

A what?

A dusk of the gods. Unfortunately, we Southerners did think we were gods.

For Heavens sake, Ashley Wilkes! Dont stand there and talk nonsense at me when its us whoare going to be winnowed out!

Something of her exasperated weariness seemed to penetrate his mind, calling it back from itswanderings, for he raised her hands with tenderness and, turning them palm up, looked at thecalluses.

These are the most beautiful hands I know, he said and kissed each palm lightly. They arebeautiful because they are strong and every callus is a medal, Scarlett, every blister an award forbravery and unselfishness. Theyve been roughened for all of us, your father, the girls, Melanie,the baby, the negroes and for me. My dear, I know what you are thinking. Youre thinking, Herestands an impractical fool talking tommyrot about dead gods when living people are in danger.

Isnt that true?

She nodded, wishing he would keep on holding her hands forever, but he dropped them.

And you came to me, hoping I could help you. Well, I cant.

His eyes were bitter as he looked toward the axe and the pile of logs.

My home is gone and all the money that I so took for granted I never realized I had it. And I amfitted for nothing in this world, for the world I belonged in has gone. I cant help you, Scarlett,except by learning with as good grace as possible to be a clumsy farmer. And that wont keep Tarafor you. Dont you think I realize the bitterness of our situation, living here on your charity Oh,yes, Scarlett, your charity. I can never repay you what youve done for me and for mine out of thekindness of your heart. I realize it more acutely every day. And every day I see more clearly howhelpless I am to cope with what has come on us all Every day my accursed shrinking fromrealities makes it harder for me to face the new realities. Do you know what I mean?

She nodded. She had no very clear idea what he meant but she clung breathlessly on his words, this was the first time he had ever spoken to her of the things he was thinking when he seemed soremote from her. It excited her as if she were on the brink of a discovery.

Its a cursethis not wanting to look on naked realities. Until the war, life was never more realto me than a shadow show on a curtain. And I preferred it so. I do not like the outlines of things tobe too sharp. I like them gently blurred, a little hazy.

He stopped and smiled faintly, shivering a little as the cold wind went through his thin shirt.

In other words, Scarlett, I am a coward.

His talk of shadow shows and hazy outlines conveyed-no meaning to her but his last words werein language she could understand. She knew they were untrue. Cowardice was not in him. Everyline of his slender body spoke of generations of brave and gallant men and Scarlett knew his warrecord by heart.

Why, thats not so! Would a coward have climbed on the cannon at Gettysburg and rallied themen? Would the General himself have written Melanie a letter about a coward? And

Thats not courage, he said tiredly. Fighting is like champagne. It goes to the heads ofcowards as quickly as of heroes. Any fool can be brave on a battle field when its be brave or elsebe killed. Im talking of something else. And my kind of cowardice is infinitely worse than if I hadrun the first time I heard a cannon fired.

His words came slowly and with difficulty as if it hurt to speak them and he seemed to stand offand look with a sad heart at what he had said. Had any other man spoken so, Scarlett would havedismissed such protestations contemptuously as mock modesty and a bid for praise. But Ashleyseemed to mean them and there was a look in his eyes which eluded hernot fear, not apology,but the bracing to a strain which was inevitable and overwhelming. The wintry wind swept herdamp ankles and she shivered again but her shiver was less from the wind than from the dread hiswords evoked in her heart.

But, Ashley, what are you afraid of?

Oh, nameless things. Things which sound very silly when they are put into words. Mostly ofhaving life suddenly become too real, of being brought into personal, too personal, contact withsome of the simple facts of life. It isnt that I mind splitting logs here in the mud, but I do mindwhat it stands for. I do mind, very much, the loss of the beauty of the old life I loved. Scarlett,before the war, life was beautiful. There was a glamour to it, a perfection and a completeness and asymmetry to it like Grecian art. Maybe it wasnt so to everyone. I know that now. But to me, livingat Twelve Oaks, there was a real beauty to living. I belonged in that life. I was a part of it. And nowit is gone and I am out of place in this new life, and I am afraid. Now, I know that in the old days itwas a shadow show I watched. I avoided everything which was not shadowy, people and situationswhich were too real, too vital. I resented their intrusion. I tried to avoid you too, Scarlett. You weretoo full of living and too real and I was cowardly enough to prefer shadows and dreams.

ButbutMelly?

Melanie is the gentlest of dreams and a part of my dreaming. And if the war had not come Iwould have lived out my life, happily buried at Twelve Oaks, contentedly watching life go by and never being a part of it. But when the war came, life as it really is thrust itself against me. The firsttime I went into actionit was at Bull Run, you rememberI saw my boyhood friends blown tobits and heard dying horses scream and learned the sickeningly horrible feeling of seeing mencrumple up and spit blood when I shot them. But those werent the worst things about the war,Scarlett. The worst thing about the war was the people I had to live with.

I had sheltered myself from people an my life, I had carefully selected my few friends. But thewar taught me I had created a world of my own with dream people in it. It taught me what peoplereally are, but it didnt teach me how to live with them. And Im afraid Ill never learn. Now, Iknow that in order to support my wife and child, I will have to make my way among a world ofpeople with whom I have nothing in common. You, Scarlett, are taking life by the horns andtwisting it to your will. But where do I fit in the world any more? I tell you I am afraid.

While his low resonant voice went on, desolate, with a feeling she could not understand, Scarlettclutched at words here and there, trying to make sense of them. But the words swooped from herhands like wild birds. Something was driving him, driving him with a cruel goad, but she did notunderstand what it was.

Scarlett, I dont know just when it was that the bleak realization came over me that my ownprivate shadow show was over. Perhaps in the first five minutes at Bull Run when I saw the firstman I killed drop to the ground. But I knew it was over and I could no longer be a spectator. No, Isuddenly found myself on the curtain, an actor, posturing and making futile gestures. My littleinner world was gone, invaded by people whose thoughts were not my thoughts, whose actionswere as alien as a Hottentots. Theyd tramped through my world with slimy feet and there was noplace left where I could take refuge when things became too bad to stand. When I was in prison, Ithought: When the war is over, I can go back to the old life and the old dreams and watch theshadow show again. But, Scarlett, theres no going back. And this which is facing all of us now isworse than war and worse than prisonand, to me, worse than death. ... So, you see, Scarlett, Imbeing punished for being afraid.

But, Ashley, she began, floundering in a quagmire of bewilderment, if youre afraid wellstarve, whywhy Oh, Ashley, well manage somehow! I know we will!

For a moment, his eyes came back to her, wide and crystal gray, and there was admiration inthem. Then, suddenly, they were remote again and she knew with a sinking heart that he had notbeen thinking about starving. They were always like two people talking to each other in differentlanguages. But she loved him so much that, when he withdrew as he had now done, it was like thewarm son going down and leaving her in chilly twilight dews. She wanted to catch him by theshoulders and hug him to her, make him realize that she was flesh and blood and not something hehad read or dreamed. If she could only feel that sense of oneness with him for which she hadyearned since that day, so long ago, when he had come home from Europe and stood on the stepsof Tara and smiled up at her.

Starvings not pleasant, he said. I know for Ive starved, but Im not afraid of that. I amafraid of facing life without the slow beauty of our old world that is gone.

Scarlett thought despairingly that Melanie would know what he meant. Melly and he werealways talking such foolishness, poetry and books and dreams and moonrays and star dust. He was not fearing the things she feared, not the gnawing of an empty stomach, nor the keenness of thewinter wind nor eviction from Tara. He was shrinking before some fear she had never known andcould not imagine. For, in Gods name, what was there to fear in this wreck of a world but hungerand cold and the loss of home?

And she had thought that if she listened closely she would know the answer to Ashley.

Oh! she said and the disappointment in her voice was that of a child who opens a beautifullywrapped package to find it empty. At her tone, he smiled ruefully as though apologizing.

Forgive me, Scarlett, for talking so. I cant make you understand because you dont know themeaning of fear. You have the heart of a lion and an utter lack of imagination and I envy you bothof those qualities. Youll never mind facing realities and youll never want to escape from them asI do.

Escape!

It was as if that were the only understandable word he had spoken. Ashley, like her, was tired ofthe struggle and he wanted to escape. Her breath came fast.

Oh, Ashley, she cried, youre wrong. I do want to escape, too. I am so very tired of it all!

His eyebrows went up in disbelief and she laid a hand, feverish and urgent, on his arm.

Listen to me, she began swiftly, the words tumbling out one over the other. Im tired of it all,I tell you. Bone tired and Im not going to stand it any longer. Ive struggled for food and formoney and Ive weeded and hoed and picked cotton and Ive even plowed until I cant stand itanother minute. I tell you, Ashley, the South is dead! Its dead! The Yankees and the free niggersand the Carpetbaggers have got it and theres nothing left for us. Ashley, lets run away!

He peered at her sharply, lowering his head to look into her face, now flaming with color.

Yes, lets run awayleave them all! Im tired of working for the folks. Somebody will takeof them. Theres always somebody who takes of people who cant take care of them(care) selves.Oh,Ashley,letsrunaway,youandI.Wecould(care) go to Mexicothey want officers inthe Mexican Army and we could be so happy there. Id work for you, Ashley. Id do anything foryou. You know you dont love Melanie

He started to speak, a stricken look on his face, but she stemmed his words with a torrent of herown.

You told me you loved me better than her that day oh, you remember that day! And I knowyou havent changed! I can tell you havent changed! And youve just said she was nothing but adream Oh, Ashley, lets go away! I could make you so happy. And anyway, she addedvenomously, Melanie cant Dr. Fontaine said she couldnt ever have any more children and Icould give you

His hands were on her shoulders so tightly that they hurt and she stopped, breathless.

We were to forget that day at Twelve Oaks.

Do you think I could ever forget it? Have you forgotten it? Can you honestly say you dontlove me?

He drew a deep breath and answered quickly.

No. I dont love you.

Thats a lie.

Even if it is a lie, said Ashley and his voice was deadly quiet, it is not something which canbe discussed.

You mean

Do you think I could go off and leave Melanie and the baby, even if I hated them both? BreakMelanies heart? Leave them both to the charity of friends? Scarlett, are you mad? Isnt there anysense of loyalty in you? You couldnt leave your father and the girls. Theyre your responsibility,just as Melanie and Beau are mine, and whether you are tired or not, they are here and youve gotto bear them.

I could leave themIm sick of themtired of them

He leaned toward her and, for a moment, she thought with a catch at her heart that he was goingto take her in his arms. But instead, he patted her arm and spoke as one comforting a child.

I know youre sick and tired. Thats why you are talking this way. Youve carried the load ofthree men. But Im going to help youI wont always be so awkward

Theres only one way you can help me, she said dully, and thats to take me away from hereand give us a new start somewhere, with a chance for happiness. Theres nothing to keep us here.

Nothing, he said quietly, nothingexcept honor.

She looked at him with baffled longing and saw, as if for the first time, how the crescents of hislashes were the thick rich gold of ripe wheat, how proudly his head sat upon his bared neck andhow the look of race and dignity persisted in his slim erect body, even through its grotesque rags.

Her eyes met his, hers naked with pleading, his remote as mountain lakes under gray skies.

She saw in them defeat of her wild dream, her mad desires.

Heartbreak and weariness sweeping over her, she dropped her head in her hands and cried. Hehad never seen her cry. He had never thought that women of her strong mettle had tears, and aflood of tenderness and remorse swept him. He came to her swiftly and in a moment had her in hisarms, cradling her comfortingly, pressing her black head to his heart, whispering: Dear! My bravedeardont! You mustnt cry!

At his touch, he felt her change within his grip and there was madness and magic in the slimbody he held and a hot soft glow in the green eyes which looked up at him. Of a sudden, it was nolonger bleak winter. For Ashley, spring was back again, that half-forgotten balmy spring of greenrustlings and murmurings, a spring of ease and indolence, careless days when the desires of youthwere warm in his body. The bitter years since then fell away and he saw that the lips turned up tohis were red and trembling and he kissed her.

There was a curious low roaring sound in her ears as of sea shells held against them and throughthe sound she dimly heard the swift thudding of her heart. Her body seemed to melt into his and,for a timeless time, they stood, fused together as his lips took hers hungrily as if he could never have enough.

When he suddenly released her she felt that she could not stand alone and gripped the fence forsupport. She raised eyes blazing with love and triumph to him.

You do love me! You do love me! Say itsay it!

His hands still rested on her shoulders and she felt them tremble and loved their trembling. Sheleaned toward him ardently but he held her away from him, looking at her with eyes from whichall remoteness had fled, eyes tormented with struggle and despair.

Dont! he said. Dont! If you do, I shall take you now, here.

She smiled a bright hot smile which was forgetful of time or place or anything but the memoryof his mouth on hers.

Suddenly he shook her, shook her until her black hair tumbled down about her shoulders, shookher as if in a mad rage at herand at himself.

We wont do this! he said. I tell you we wont do it!

It seemed as if her neck would snap if he shook her again. She was blinded by her hair andstunned by his action. She wrenched herself away and stared at him. There were small beads ofmoisture on his forehead and his fists were curled into claws as if in pain. He looked at her directly,his gray eyes piercing.

Its all my faultnone of yours and it will never happen again, because I am going to takeMelanie and the baby and go.

Go? she cried in anguish. Oh, no!

Yes, by God! Do you think Ill stay here after this? When this might happen again

But, Ashley, you cant go. Why should you go? You love me

You want me to say it? All right, Ill say it. I love you.

He leaned over her with a sudden savagery which made her shrink back against the fence.

I love you, your courage and your stubbornness and your fire and your utter ruthlessness. Howmuch do I love you? So much that a moment ago I would have outraged the hospitality of thehouse which has sheltered me and my family, forgotten the best wife any man ever hadenoughto take you here in the mud like a

She struggled with a chaos of thoughts and there was a cold pain in her heart as if an icicle hadpierced it. She said haltingly: If you felt like thatand didnt take methen you dont love me.

I can never make you understand.

They fell silent and looked at each other. Suddenly Scarlett shivered and saw, as if coming backfrom a long journey, that it was winter and the fields were bare and harsh with stubble and she wasvery cold. She saw too that the old aloof face of Ashley, the one she knew so well, had come backand it was wintry too, and harsh with hurt and remorse.

She would have turned and left him then, seeking the shelter of the house to hide herself, but she was too tired to move. Even speech was a labor and a weariness.

There is nothing left, she said at last. Nothing left for me. Nothing to love. Nothing to fightfor. You are gone and Tara is going.

He looked at her for a long space and then, leaning, scooped up a small wad of red clay from theground.

Yes, there is something left, he said, and the ghost of his old smile came back, the smile whichmocked himself as well as her. Something you love better than me, though you may not know it.

Youve still got Tara.

He took her limp hand and pressed the damp clay into it and closed her fingers about it. Therewas no fever in his hands now, nor in hers. She looked at the red soil for a moment and it meantnothing to her. She looked at him and realized dimly that there was an integrity of spirit in himwhich was not to be torn apart by her passionate hands, nor by any hands.

If it killed him, he would never leave Melanie. If he burned for Scarlett until the end of his days,he would never take her and he would fight to keep her at a distance. She would never again getthrough that armor. The words, hospitality and loyalty and honor, meant more to him than she did.

The clay was cold in her hand and she looked at it again.

Yes, she said, Ive still got this.

At first, the words meant nothing and the clay was only red clay. But unbidden came the thoughtof the sea of red dirt which surrounded Tara and how very dear it was and how hard she had foughtto keep ithow hard she was going to have to fight if she wished to keep it hereafter. She lookedat him again and wondered where the hot flood of feeling had gone. She could think but could notfeel, not about him nor Tara either, for she was drained of all emotion.

You need not go, she said clearly. I wont have you all starve, simply because Ive thrownmyself at your head. It will never happen again.

She turned away and started back toward the house across the rough fields, twisting her hair intoa knot upon her neck. Ashley watched her go and saw her square her small thin shoulders as shewent. And that gesture went to his heart, more than any words she had spoken.

Chapter 32

SHE WAS STILL CLUTCHING the ball of red clay when she went up the front steps. She hadcarefully avoided the back entrance, for Mammys sharp eyes would certainly have seen thatsomething was greatly amiss. Scarlett did not want to see Mammy or anyone else. She did not feelthat she could endure seeing anyone or talking to anyone again. She had no feeling of shame ordisappointment or bitterness now, only a weakness of the knees and a great emptiness of heart. Shesqueezed the clay so tightly it ran out from her clenched fist and she said over and over, parrot-like: Ive still got this. Yes, Ive still got this.

There was nothing else she did have, nothing but this red land, this land she had been willing tothrow away like a torn handkerchief only a few minutes before, Now, it was dear to her again and she wondered dully what madness had possessed her to hold it so lightly. Had Ashley yielded, shecould have gone away with him and left family and friends without a backward look but, even inher emptiness, she knew it would have torn her heart to leave these dear red hills and long washedgullies and gaunt black pines. Her thoughts would have turned back to them hungrily until the dayshe died. Not even Ashley could have filled the empty spaces in her heart where Tara. had beenuprooted. How wise Ashley was and how well he knew her! He had only to press the damp earthinto her hand to bring her to her senses.

She was in the hall preparing to close the door when she heard the sound of horses hooves andturned to look down the driveway. To have visitors at this of all times was too much. Shed hurryto her room and plead a headache.

But when the carriage came nearer, her flight was checked by her amazement. It was a newcarriage, shiny with varnish, and the harness was new too, with bits of polished brass here andthere. Strangers, certainly. No one she knew had the money for such a grand new turn-out as this.

She stood in the doorway watching, the cold draft blowing her skirts about her damp ankles.

Then the carriage stopped in front of the house and Jonas Wilkerson alighted. Scarlett was sosurprised at the sight of their former overseer driving so fine a rig and in so splendid a greatcoatshe could not for a moment believe her eyes. Will had told her he looked quite prosperous since hegot his new job with the Freedmens Bureau. Made a lot of money, Will said, swindling the niggersor the government, one or tuther, or confiscating folks cotton and swearing it was Confederategovernment cotton. Certainly he never came by all that money honestly in these hard times.

And here he was now, stepping out of an elegant carriage and handing down a woman dressedwithin an inch of her life. Scarlett saw in a glance that the dress was bright in color to the point ofvulgarity but nevertheless her eyes went over the outfit hungrily. It had been so long since she hadeven seen stylish new clothes. Well! So hoops arent so wide this year, she thought, scanning thered plaid gown. And, as she took in the black velvet paletot, how short jackets are! And what acunning hat! Bonnets must be out of style, for this hat was only an absurd flat red velvet affair,perched on the top of the womans head like a stiffened pancake. The ribbons did not tie under thechin as bonnet ribbons tied but in the back under the massive bunch of curls which fell from therear of the hat, curls which Scarlett could not help noticing did not match the womans hair ineither color or texture.

As the woman stepped to the ground and looked toward the house, Scarlett saw there wassomething familiar about the rabbity face, caked with white powder.

Why, its Emmie Slattery! she cried, so surprised she spoke the words aloud.

Yesm, its me, said Emmie, tossing her head with an ingratiating smile and starting towardthe steps.

Emmie Slattery! The dirty tow-headed slut whose illegitimate baby Ellen had baptized, Emmiewho had given typhoid to Ellen and killed her. This overdressed, common, nasty piece of poorwhite trash was coming up the steps of Tara, bridling and grinning as if she belonged here. Scarlettthought of Ellen and, in a rush, feeling came back into the emptiness of her mind, a murderousrage so strong it shook her like the ague.

Get off those steps, you trashy wench! she cried. Get off this land! Get out!

Emmies jaw sagged suddenly and she glanced at Jonas who came up with lowering brows. Hemade an effort at dignity, despite his anger.

You must not speak that way to my wife, he said.

Wife? said Scarlett and burst into a laugh that was cutting with contempt. High time youmade her your wife. Who baptized your other brats after you killed my mother?

Emmie said Oh! and retreated hastily down the steps but Jonas stopped her flight toward thecarriage with a rough grip on her arm.

We came out here to pay a calla friendly call, he snarled. And talk a little business with oldfriends

Friends? Scarletts voice was like a whiplash. When were we ever friends with the like ofyou? The Slatterys lived on our charity and paid it back by killing Motherand youyou Padischarged you about Emmies brat and you know it. Friends? Get off this place before I call Mr.

Benteen and Mr. Wilkes.

Under the words, Emmie broke her husbands hold and fled for the carriage, scrambling in witha flash of patent-leather boots with bright-red tops and red tassels.

Now Jonas shook with a fury equal to Scarletts and his sallow face was as red as an angryturkey gobblers.

Still high and mighty, arent you? Well, I know all about you. I know you havent got shoes foryour feet. I know your fathers turned idiot

Get off this place!

Oh, you wont sing that way very long. I know youre broke. I know you cant even pay yourtaxes. I came out here to offer to buy this place from youto make you a right good offer. Emmiehad a hankering to live here. But, by God, I wont give you a cent now! You highflying, bog-trotting Irish will find out whos running things around here when you get sold out for taxes. AndIll buy this place, lock, stock and barrelfurniture and alland Ill live in it.

So it was Jonas Wilkerson who wanted TaraJonas and Emmie, who in some twisted waythought to even past slights by living in the home where they had been slighted. All her nerveshummed with hate, as they had hummed that day when she shoved the pistol barrel into theYankees bearded face and fired. She wished she had that pistol now.

Ill tear this house down, stone by stone, and burn it and sow every acre with salt before I seeeither of you put foot over this threshold, she shouted. Get out, I tell you! Get out!

Jonas glared at her, started to say more and then walked toward the carriage. He climbed inbeside his whimpering wife and turned the horse. As they drove off, Scarlett had the impulse tospit at them. She did spit. She knew it was a common, childish gesture but it made her feel better.

She wished she had done it while they could see her.

Those damned nigger lovers daring to come here and taunt her about her poverty! That houndnever intended offering her a price for Tara. He just used that as an excuse to come and flaunt himself and Emmie in her face. The dirty Scalawags, the lousy trashy poor whites, boasting theywould live at Tara!

Then, sudden terror struck her and her rage melted. Gods nightgown! They will come and livehere! There was nothing she could do to keep them from buying Tara, nothing to keep them fromlevying on every mirror and table and bed, on Ellens shining mahogany and rosewood, and everybit of it precious to her, scarred though it was by the Yankee raiders. And the Robillard silver too. Iwont let them do it, thought Scarlett vehemently. No, not if Ive got to burn the place down!

Emmie Slattery will never set her foot on a single bit of flooring Mother ever walked on!

She closed the door and leaned against it and she was very frightened. More frightened eventhan she had been that day when Shermans army was in the house. That day the worst she couldfear was that Tara would be burned over her head. But this was worsethese low commoncreatures living in this house, bragging to their low common friends how they had turned the proudOHaras out. Perhaps theyd even bring negroes here to dine and sleep. Will had told her Jonasmade a great to-do about being equal with the negroes, ate with them, visited in their houses, rodethem around with him in his carriage, put his arms around their shoulders.

When she thought of the possibility of this final insult to Tara, her heart pounded so hard shecould scarcely breathe. She was trying to get her mind on her problem, trying to figure some wayout, but each time she collected her thoughts, fresh gusts of rage and fear shook her. There must besome way out, there must be someone somewhere who had money she could borrow. Moneycouldnt just dry up and blow away. Somebody had to have money. Then the laughing words ofAshley came back to her:

Only one person, Rhett Butler  who has money.

Rhett Butler. She walked quickly into the parlor and shut the door behind her. The dim gloom ofdrawn blinds and winter twilight closed about her. No one would think of hunting for her here andshe wanted time to think, undisturbed. The idea which had just occurred to her was so simple shewondered why she had not thought of it before.

Ill get the money from Rhett. Ill sell him the diamond earbobs. Or Ill borrow the money fromhim and let him keep the earbobs till I can pay him back.

For a moment, relief was so great she felt weak. She would pay the taxes and laugh in JonasWilkersons face. But close on this happy thought came relentless knowledge.

Its not only for this year that Ill need tax money. Theres next year and all the years of my life.

If I pay up this time, theyll raise the taxes higher next time till they drive me out. If I make a goodcotton crop, theyll tax it till Ill get nothing for it or maybe confiscate it outright and say itsConfederate cotton. The Yankees and the scoundrels teamed up with them have got me where theywant me. All my life, as long as I live, Ill be afraid theyll get me somehow. All my life Ill bescared and scrambling for money and working myself to death, only to see my work go for nothingand my cotton stolen. ... Just borrowing three hundred dollars for the taxes will be only a stopgap.

What I want is to get out of this fix, for goodso I can go to sleep at night without worrying overwhats going to happen to me tomorrow, and next month, and next year.

Her mind ticked on steadily. Coldly and logically an idea grew in her brain. She thought of Rhett, a flash of white teeth against swarthy skin, sardonic black eyes caressing her. She recalledthe hot night in Atlanta, close to the end of the siege, when he sat on Aunt Pittys porch half hiddenin the summer darkness, and she felt again the heat of his hand upon her arm as he said: I wantyou more than I have ever wanted any womanand Ive waited longer for you than Ive everwaited for any woman.

Ill marry him, she thought coolly. And then Ill never have to bother about money again.

Oh, blessed thought, sweeter than hope of Heaven, never to worry about money again, to knowthat Tara was safe, that the family was fed and clothed, that she would never again have to bruiseherself against stone walls!

She felt very old. The afternoons events had drained her of all feeling, first the startling newsabout the taxes, then Ashley and, last, her murderous rage at Jonas Wilkerson. Now there was noemotion left in her. If all her capacity to feel had not been utterly exhausted, something in herwould have protested against the plan taking form in her mind, for she hated Rhett as she hated noother person in all the world. But she could not feel. She could only think and her thoughts werevery practical.

I said some terrible things to him that night when he deserted us on the road, but I can makehim forget them, she thought contemptuously, still sure of her power to charm. Butter wont meltin my mouth when Im around him. Ill make him think I always loved him and was just upset andfrightened that night. Oh, men are so conceited theyll believe anything that flatters them. ... I mustnever let him dream what straits were in, not till Ive got him. Oh, he mustnt know! If he evensuspected how poor we are, hed know it was his money I wanted and not himself. After all, theresno way he could know, for even Aunt Pitty doesnt know the worst. And after Ive married him,hell have to help us. He cant let his wifes people starve. His wife. Mrs. Rhett Butler. Somethingof repulsion, buried deep beneath her cold thinking, stirred faintly and then was stilled. Sheremembered the embarrassing and disgusting events of her brief honeymoon with Charles, hisfumbling hands, his awkwardness, his incomprehensible emotionsand Wade Hampton.

I wont think about it now. Ill bother about it after Ive married him. ...

After she had married him. Memory rang a bell. A chill went down her spine. She rememberedagain that night on Aunt Pittys porch, remembered how she asked him if he was proposing to her,remembered how hatefully he had laughed and said: My dear, Im not a marrying man.

Suppose he was still not a marrying man. Suppose despite all her charms and wiles, he refusedto marry her. Supposeoh, terrible thought!suppose he had completely forgotten about her andwas chasing after some other woman.

I want you more than I have ever wanted any woman. ...

Scarletts nails dug into her palms as she clenched her fists. If hes forgotten me, Ill make himremember me. Ill make him want me again.

And, if he would not marry her but still wanted her, there was a way to get the money. After all,he had once asked her to be his mistress.

In the dim grayness of the parlor she fought a quick decisive battle with the three most binding ties of her soulthe memory of Ellen, the teachings of her religion and her love for Ashley. Sheknew that what she had in her mind must be hideous to her mother even in that warm far-offHeaven where she surely was. She knew that fornication was a mortal sin. And she knew that,loving Ashley as she did, her plan was doubly prostitution.

But all these things went down before the merciless coldness of her mind and the goad ofdesperation. Ellen was dead and perhaps death gave an understanding of all things. Religionforbade fornication on pain of hell fire but if the Church thought she was going to leave one stoneunturned in saving Tara and saving the family from starvingwell, let the Church bother aboutthat. She wouldnt. At least, not now. And AshleyAshley didnt want her. Yes, he did want her.

The memory of his warm mouth on hers told her that. But he would never take her away with him.

Strange that going away with Ashley did not seem like a sin, but with RhettIn the dull twilight of the winter afternoon she came to the end of the long road which had begunthe night Atlanta fell. She had set her feet upon that road a spoiled, selfish and untried girl, full ofyouth, warm of emotion, easily bewildered by life. Now, at the end of the road, there was nothingleft of that girl. Hunger and hard labor, fear and constant strain, the terrors of war and the terrors ofReconstruction had taken away all warmth and youth and softness. About the core of her being, ashell of hardness had formed and, little by little, layer by layer, the shell had thickened during theendless months.

But until this very day, two hopes had been left to sustain her. She had hoped that the war beingover, life would gradually resume its old face. She had hoped that Ashleys return would bringback some meaning into life. Now both hopes were gone. The sight of Jonas Wilkerson in the frontwalk of Tara had made her realize that for her, for the whole South, the war would never end. Thebitterest fighting, the most brutal retaliations, were just beginning. And Ashley was imprisonedforever by words which were stronger than any jail.

Peace had failed her and Ashley had failed her, both in the same day, and it was as if the lastcrevice in the shell had been sealed, the final layer hardened. She had become what GrandmaFontaine had counseled against, a woman who had seen the worst and so had nothing else to fear.

Not life nor Mother nor loss of love nor public opinion. Only hunger and her nightmare dream ofhunger could make her afraid.

A curious sense of lightness, of freedom, pervaded her now that she had finally hardened herheart against all that bound her to the old days and the old Scarlett. She had made her decision and,thank God, she wasnt afraid. She had nothing to lose and her mind was made up.

If she could only coax Rhett into marrying her, all would be perfect. But if she couldntwell,shed get the money just the same. For a brief moment she wondered with impersonal curiositywhat would be expected of a mistress. Would Rhett insist on keeping her in Atlanta as people saidhe kept the Watling woman? If he made her stay in Atlanta, hed have to pay wellpay enough tobalance what her absence from Tara would be worth. Scarlett was very ignorant of the hidden sideof mens lives and had no way of knowing just what the arrangement might involve. And shewondered if she would have a baby. That would be distinctly terrible.

I wont think of that now. Ill think of it later, and she pushed the unwelcome idea into theback of her mind lest it shake her resolution. Shed tell the family tonight she was going to Atlanta to borrow money, to try to mortgage the farm if necessary. That would be all they needed to knowuntil such an evil day when they might find out differently.

With the thought of action, her head went up and her shoulders went back. This affair was notgoing to be easy, she knew. Formerly, it had been Rhett who asked for her favors and she who heldthe power. Now she was the beggar and a beggar in no position to dictate terms.

But I wont go to him like a beggar. Ill go like a queen granting favors. Hell never know.

She walked to the long pier glass and looked at herself, her head held high. And she saw framedin the cracking gilt molding a stranger. It was as if she were really seeing herself for the first timein a year. She had glanced in the mirror every morning to see that her face was clean and her hairtidy but she had always been too pressed by other things to really see herself. But this stranger!

Surely this thin hollow-cheeked woman couldnt be Scarlett OHara! Scarlett OHara had a pretty,coquettish, high-spirited face. This face at which she stared was not pretty at all and had none ofthe charm she remembered so well. It was white and strained and the black brows above slantinggreen eyes swooped up startlingly against the white skin like frightened birds wings. There was ahard and hunted look about this face.

Im not pretty enough to get him! she thought and desperation came back to her. Im thinoh, Im terribly thin!

She patted her cheeks, felt frantically at her collar bones, feeling them stand out through herbasque. And her breasts were so small, almost as small as Melanies. Shed have to put ruffles inher bosom to make them look larger and she had always had contempt for girls who resorted tosuch subterfuges. Ruffles! That brought up another thought. Her clothes. She looked down at herdress, spreading its mended folds wide between her hands. Rhett liked women who were welldressed, fashionably dressed. She remembered with longing the flounced green dress she had wornwhen she first came out of mourning, the dress she wore with the green plumed bonnet he hadbrought her and she recalled the approving compliments he had paid her. She remembered, too,with hate sharpened by envy the red plaid dress, the red-topped boots with tassels and the pancakehat of Emmie Slattery. They were gaudy but they were new and fashionable and certainly theycaught the eye. And, oh, how she wanted to catch the eye! Especially the eye of Rhett Butler! If heshould see her in her old clothes, hed know everything was wrong at Tara. And he must not know.

What a fool she had been to think she could go to Atlanta and have him for the asking, she withher scrawny neck and hungry cat eyes and raggedy dress! If she hadnt been able to pry a proposalfrom him at the height of her beauty, when she had her prettiest clothes, how could she expect toget one now when she was ugly and dressed tackily? If Miss Pittys story was true, he must havemore money than anyone in Atlanta and probably had his pick of all the pretty ladies, good andbad. Well, she thought grimly, Ive got something that most pretty ladies havent gotand thats amind thats made up. And if I had just one nice dressThere wasnt a nice dress in Tara or a dress which hadnt been turned twice and mended.

Thats that, she thought, disconsolately looking down at the floor. She saw Ellens moss-greenvelvet carpet, now worn and scuffed and torn and spotted from the numberless men who had sleptupon it, and the sight depressed her more, for it made her realize that Tara was just as ragged as she. The whole darkening room depressed her and, going to the window, she raised the sash,unlatched the shutters and let the last light of the wintry sunset into the room. She closed thewindow and leaned her head against the velvet curtains and looked out across the bleak pasturetoward the dark cedars of the burying ground.

The moss-green velvet curtains felt prickly and soft beneath her cheek and she rubbed her faceagainst them gratefully, like a cat And then suddenly she looked at them.

A minute later, she was dragging a heavy marble-topped table across the floor. Its rusty castorsscreeching in protest. She rolled the table under the window, gathered up her skirts, climbed on itand tiptoed to reach the heavy curtain pole. It was almost out of her reach and she jerked at it soimpatiently the nails came out of the wood, and the curtains, pole and all, fell to the floor with aclatter.

As if by magic, the door of the parlor opened and the wide black face of Mammy appeared,ardent curiosity and deepest suspicion evident in every wrinkle. She looked disapprovingly atScarlett, poised on the table top, her skirts above her knees, ready to leap to the floor. There was alook of excitement and triumph on her face which brought sudden distrust to Mammy.

Whut you up to wid Miss Ellens poteers? she demanded.

What are you up to listening outside doors? asked Scarlett, leaping nimbly to the floor andgathering up a length of the heavy dusty velvet.

Dat ain needer hyah no dar, countered Mammy, girding herself for combat You ain got nobizness wid Miss Ellens poteers, juckin de poles plum outer de wood, an drappin dem on deflo in de dust. Miss Ellen set gret sto by dem poteers an Ah ain tendin ter have you muss demup dat way.

Scarlett turned green eyes on Mammy, eyes which were feverishly gay, eyes which looked likethe bad little girl of the good old days Mammy sighed about.

Scoot up to the attic and get my box of dress patterns, Mammy, she cried, giving her a slightshove. Im going to have a new dress.

Mammy was torn between indignation at the very idea of her two hundred pounds scootinganywhere, much less to the attic, and the dawning of a horrid suspicion. Quickly she snatched thecurtain lengths from Scarlett, holding them against her monumental, sagging breasts as if theywere holy relics.

Not outer Miss Ellens poteers is you gwine have a new dress, ef dats whut you figgerin on.

Not wile Ah got breaf in mah body.

For a moment the expression Mammy was wont to describe to herself as bullheaded flittedover her young mistress face and then it passed into a smile, so difficult for Mammy to resist. Butit did not fool the old woman. She knew Miss Scarlett was employing that smile merely to getaround her and in this matter she was determined not to be gotten around.

Mammy, dont be mean. Im going to Atlanta to borrow some money and Ive got to have anew dress.

You doan need no new dress. Ain no other ladies got new dresses. Dey weahs dey ole ones an dey weahs dem proudfully. Ain no reason why Miss Ellens chile kain weah rags ef she wants ter,an eveybody respec her lak she wo silk.

The bullheaded expression began to creep back. Lordy, twus right funny how de older MissScarlett git de mo she look lak Mist Gerald and de less lak Miss Ellen!

Now, Mammy, you know Aunt Pitty wrote us that Miss Fanny Elsing is getting married thisSaturday, and of course Ill go to the wedding. And Ill need a new dress to wear.

De dress you got onll be jes as nice as Miss Fannys weddin dress. Miss Pitty done wrote datde Elsings mighty po.

But Ive got to have a new dress! Mammy, you dont know how we need money. The taxes

Yasm, Ah knows all bout de taxes but

You do?

Wellm, Gawd give me ears, din he, an ter hear wid? Specially wen Mist Will doan never tektrouble ter close de do.

Was there nothing Mammy did not overhear? Scarlett wondered how that ponderous body whichshook the floors could move with such savage stealth when its owner wished to eavesdrop.

Well, if you heard all that, I suppose you heard Jonas Wilkerson and that Emmie

Yasm, said Mammy with smoldering eyes.

Well, dont be a mule, Mammy. Dont you see Ive got to go to Atlanta and get money for thetaxes? Ive got to get some money. Ive got to do it! She hammered one small fist into the other.

Name of God, Mammy, theyll turn us all out into the road and then wherell we go? Are yougoing to argue with me about a little matter of Mothers curtains when that trash Emmie Slatterywho killed Mother is fixing to move into this house and sleep in the bed Mother slept in?

Mammy shifted from one foot to another like a restive elephant. She had a dim feeling that shewas being got around.

Nom, Ah ain wantin ter see trash in Miss Ellens house or us all in de road but She fixedScarlett with a suddenly accusing eye: Who is you fixin ter git money frum dat you needs a newdress?

That, said Scarlett, taken aback, is my own business.

Mammy looked at her piercingly, just as she had done when Scarlett was small and had triedunsuccessfully to palm off plausible excuses for misdeeds. She seemed to be reading her mind andScarlett dropped her eyes unwillingly, the first feeling of guilt at her intended conduct creepingover her.

So you needs a spang new pretty dress ter borry money wid. Dat doan lissen jes right ter me.

An you ain sayin whar de money ter come frum.

Im not saying anything, said Scarlett indignantly. Its my own business. Are you going togive me that curtain and help me make the dress?

Yasm, said Mammy softly, capitulating with a suddenness which aroused all the suspicion in Scarletts mind. Ah gwine hep you mek it an Ah specs we mout git a petticoat outer de satinlinin of de poteers an trim a par pantalets wid de lace cuttins.

She handed the velvet curtain back to Scarlett and a sly smile spread over her face.

Miss Melly gwine ter Lanta wid you, Miss Scarlett?

No, said Scarlett sharply, beginning to realize what was coming. Im going by myself.

Dats whut you thinks, said Mammy firmly, but Ah is gwine wid you an dat new dress. Yas,Mam, evey step of de way.

For an instant Scarlett envisaged her trip to Atlanta and her conversation with Rhett withMammy glowering chaperonage like a large black Cerberus in the background. She smiled againand put a hand on Mammys arm.

Mammy darling, youre sweet to want to go with me and help me, but how on earth would thefolks here get on without you? You know you just about run Tara.

Huh! said Mammy. Doan do no good ter sweet talk me, Miss Scarlett. Ah been knowin yousence Ah put de fust par of diapers on you. Ahs said Ahs gwine ter Lanta wid you an gwine Ahis. Miss Ellen be tuhnin in her grabe at you gwine up dar by yoseff wid dat town full up widYankees an free niggers an sech like.

But Ill be at Aunt Pittypats, Scarlett offered frantically.

Miss Pittypat a fine woman an she think she see eveything but she doan, said Mammy, andturning with the majestic air of having closed the interview, she went into the hall. The boardstrembled as she called:

Prissy, child! Fly up de stairs an fotch Miss Scarletts pattun box frum de attic an try an finede scissors without takin all night bout it.

This is a fine mess, thought Scarlett dejectedly. Id as soon have a bloodhound after me.

After supper had been cleared away, Scarlett and Mammy spread patterns on the dining-roomtable while Suellen and Carreen busily ripped satin linings from curtains and Melanie brushed thevelvet with a clean hairbrush to remove the dust. Gerald, Will and Ashley sat about the roomsmoking, smiling at the feminine tumult. A feeling of pleasurable excitement which seemed toemanate from Scarlett was on them all, an excitement they could not understand. There was colorin Scarletts face and a bright hard glitter in her eyes and she laughed a good deal. Her laughterpleased them all, for it had been months since they had heard her really laugh. Especially did itplease Gerald. His eyes were less vague than-usual as they followed her swishing figure about theroom and he patted her approvingly whenever she was within reach. The girls were as excited as ifpreparing for a ball and they ripped and cut and basted as if making a ball dress of their own.

Scarlett was going to Atlanta to borrow money or to mortgage Tara if necessary. But what was amortgage, after all? Scarlett said they could easily pay it off out of next years cotton and havemoney left over, and she said it with such finality they did not think to question. And when theyasked who was going to lend the money she said: Layovers catch meddlers, so archly they alllaughed and teased her about her millionaire friend.

It must be Captain Rhett Butler, said Melanie slyly and they exploded with mirth at thisabsurdity, knowing how Scarlett hated him and never failed to refer to him as that skunk, RhettButler.

But Scarlett did not laugh at this and Ashley, who had laughed, stopped abruptly as he sawMammy shoot a quick, guarded glance at Scarlett.

Suellen, moved to generosity by the party spirit of the occasion, produced her Irish-lace collar,somewhat worn but still pretty, and Carreen insisted that Scarlett wear her slippers to Atlanta, forthey were in better condition than any others at Tara. Melanie begged Mammy to leave her enoughvelvet scraps to recover the frame of her battered bonnet and brought shouts of laughter when shesaid the old rooster was going to part with his gorgeous bronze and green-black tail feathers unlesshe took to the swamp immediately.

Scarlett, watching the flying fingers, heard the laughter and looked at them all with concealedbitterness and contempt.

They havent an idea what is really happening to me or to themselves or to the South. They stillthink, in spite of everything, that nothing really dreadful can happen to any of them because theyare who they are, OHaras, Wilkeses, Hamiltons. Even the darkies feel that way. Oh, theyre allfools! Theyll never realize! Theyll go right on thinking and living as they always have, andnothing will change them. Melly can dress in rags and pick cotton and even help me murder a manbut it doesnt change her. Shes still the shy well-bred Mrs. Wilkes, the perfect lady! And Ashleycan see death and war and be wounded and lie in jail and come home to less than nothing and stillbe the same gentleman he was when he had all Twelve Oaks behind him. Will is different. Heknows how things really are but then Will never had anything much to lose. And as for Suellen andCarreenthey think all this is just a temporary matter. They dont change to meet changed conditionsbecause they think itll all be over soon. They think God is going to work a miracle especiallyfor their benefit. But He wont. The only miracle thats going to be worked around here is the oneIm going to work on Rhett Butler. ... They wont change. Maybe they cant change. Im the onlyone whos changedand I wouldnt have changed if I could have helped it.

Mammy finally turned the men out of the dining room and closed the door, so the fitting couldbegin. Pork helped Gerald upstairs to bed and Ashley and Will were left alone in the lamplight inthe front hall. They were silent for a while and Will chewed his tobacco like a placid ruminantanimal. But his mild face was far from placid.

This goin to Atlanta, he said at last in a slow voice, I dont like it. Not one bit.

Ashley looked at Will quickly and then looked away, saying nothing but wondering if Will hadthe same awful suspicion which was haunting him. But that was impossible. Will didnt know whathad taken place in the orchard that afternoon and how it had driven Scarlett to desperation. Willcouldnt have noticed Mammys face when Rhett Butlers name was mentioned and, besides, Willdidnt know about Rhetts money or his foul reputation. At least, Ashley did not think he couldknow these things, but since coming back to Tara he had realized that Will, like Mammy, seemedto know things without being told, to sense them before they happened. There was somethingominous in the air, exactly what Ashley did nut know, but he was powerless to save Scarlett fromit. She had not met his eyes once that evening and the hard bright gaiety with which she had treated him was frightening. The suspicions which tore at him were too terrible to be put intowords. He did not have the right to insult her by asking her if they were true. He clenched his fists.

He had no rights at all where she was concerned; this afternoon he had forfeited them all, forever.

He could not help her. No one could help her. But when he thought of Mammy and the look ofgrim determination she wore as she cut into the velvet curtains, he was cheered a little. Mammywould take care of Scarlett whether Scarlett wished it or not.

I have caused all this, he thought despairingly. I have driven her to this.

He remembered the way she had squared her shoulders when she turned away from him thatafternoon, remembered the stubborn lift of her head. His heart went out to her, torn with his ownhelplessness, wrenched with admiration. He knew she had no such word in her vocabulary asgallantry, knew she would have stared blankly if he had told her she was the most gallant soul hehad ever known. He knew she would not understand how many truly fine things he ascribed to herwhen he thought of her as gallant He knew that she took life as it came, opposed her tough-fiberedmind to whatever obstacles there might be, fought with a determination that would not recognize defeat, and kept on fighting even when she saw d(on) efeat was inevitable.

But, for four years, he had seen others who had refused to recognize defeat, men who rode gailyinto sure disaster because they were gallant And they had been defeated, just the same.

He thought as he stared at Will in the shadowy hall that he had never known such gallantry asthe gallantry of Scarlett OHara going forth to conquer the world in her mothers velvet curtainsand the tail feathers of a rooster.

Chapter 33

A COLD WIND was blowing stiffly and the scudding clouds overhead were the deep gray ofslate when Scarlett and Mammy stepped from the train in Atlanta the next afternoon. The depothad not been rebuilt since the burning of the city and they alighted amid cinders and mud a fewyards above the blackened ruins which marked the site. Habit strong upon her, Scarlett lookedabout for Uncle Peter and Pittys carriage, for she had always been met by them when returningfrom Tara to Atlanta during the war years. Then she caught herself with a sniff at her own absentmindedness.

Naturally, Peter wasnt there for she had given Aunt Pitty no warning of her comingand, moreover, she remembered that one of the old ladys letters had dealt tearfully with the deathof the old nag Peter had  quired in Macon to bring her back to Atlanta after the surrender.

She looked about the rutted and cut-up space around the depot for the equipage of some oldfriend or acquaintance who might drive them to Aunt Pittys house but she recognized no one,black or white. Probably none of her old friends owned carriages now, if what Pitty had writtenthem was true. Times were so hard it was difficult to feed and lodge humans, much less animals.

Most of Pittys friends, like herself, were afoot these days.

There were a few wagons loading at the freight cars and several mud-splashed buggies withrough-looking strangers at the reins but only two carriages. One was a closed carriage, the otheropen and occupied by a well-dressed woman and a Yankee officer. Scarlett drew in her breathsharply at the sight of the uniform. Although Pitty had written that Atlanta was garrisoned and the streets full of soldiers, the first sight of the bluecoat startled and frightened her. It was hard toremember that the war was over and that this man would not pursue her, rob her and insult her.

The comparative emptiness around the train took her mind back to that morning in 1862 whenshe had come to Atlanta as a young widow, swathed in crpe and wild with boredom. She recalledhow crowded this space had been with wagons and carriages and ambulances and how noisy withdrivers swearing and yelling and people calling greetings to friends. She sighed for the lightheartedexcitement of the war days and sighed again at the thought of walking all the way to AuntPittys house. But she was hopeful that once on Peachtree Street, she might meet someone sheknew who would give them a ride.

As she stood looking about her a saddle-colored negro of middle age drove the dosed carriagetoward her and, leaning from the box, questioned: Cahige, lady? Two bits fer any whar inLanta.

Mammy threw him an annihilating glance.

A hired hack! she rumbled. Nigger, does you know who we is?

Mammy was a country negro but she had not always been a country negro and she knew that nochaste woman ever rode in a hired conveyanceespecially a closed carriagewithout the escortof some male member of her family. Even the presence of a negro maid would not satisfy theconventions. She gave Scarlett a glare as she saw her look longingly at the hack.

Come way frum dar, Miss Scarlett! A hired hack an a free issue nigger! Well, dats a goodcombination.

Ah ain no free issue nigger, declared the driver with heat. Ah blongs ter Ole Miss Talbot an

disyere her cahige an Ah drives it ter mek money fer us.

Whut Miss Talbot is dat?

Miss Suzannah Talbot of Milledgeville. Us done move up hyah affer Old Marse wuz kilt.

Does you know her, Miss Scarlett?

No, said Scarlett, regretfully. I know so few Milledgeville folks.

Den usll walk, said Mammy sternly. Drive on, nigger.

She picked up the carpetbag which held Scarletts new velvet frock and bonnet and nightgownand tucked the neat bandanna bundle that contained her own belongings under her arm andshepherded Scarlett across the wet expanse of cinders. Scarlett did not argue the matter, much asshe preferred to ride, for she wished no disagreement with Mammy. Ever since yesterday afternoonwhen Mammy had caught her with the velvet curtains, there had been an alert suspicious look inher eyes which Scarlett did not like. It was going to be difficult to escape from her chaperonageand she did not intend to rouse Mammys fighting blood before it was absolutely necessary.

As they walked along the sidewalk toward Peachtree, Scarlett was dismayed and sorrowful,forAtlantalookedsodevast(narrow) ated and different from what she remembered. They passedbeside what had been the Atlanta Hotel where Rhett and Uncle Henry had lived and of that eleganthostelry there remained only a shell, a part of the blackened walls. The warehouses which had bor dered the train tracks for a quarter of a mile and held tons of military supplies had not been rebuiltand their rectangular foundations looked dreary under the dark sky. Without the wall of buildingson either side and with the car shed gone, the railroad tracks seemed bare and exposed. Somewhereamid these ruins, undistinguishable from the others, lay what remained of her own warehouse onthe property Charles had left her. Uncle Henry had paid last years taxes on it for her. Shed haveto repay that money some time. That was something else to worry about.

As they turned the corner into Peachtree Street and she looked toward Five Points, she cried outwith shock. Despite all Frank had told her about the town burning to the ground, she had neverreally visualized complete destruction. In her mind the town she loved so well still stood full ofclose-packed buildings and fine houses. But this Peachtree Street she was looking upon was sodenuded of landmarks it was as unfamiliar as if she had never seen it before. This muddy streetdown which she had driven a thousand times during the war, along which she had fled with duckedhead and fear-quickened legs when shells burst over her during the siege, this street she had lastseen in the heat and hurry and anguish of the day of the retreat, was so strange looking she felt likecrying.

Though many new buildings had sprung up in the year since Sherman marched out of theburning town and the Confederates returned, there were still wide vacant lots around Five Pointswhere heaps of smudged broken bricks lay amid a jumble of rubbish, dead weeds and broom-sedge. There were the remains of a few buildings she remembered, roofless brick walls throughwhich the dull daylight shone, glassless windows gaping, chimneys towering lonesomely. Here andthere her eyes gladly picked out a familiar store which had partly survived shell and fire and hadbeen repaired, the fresh red of new brick glaring bright against the smut of the old walls. On newstore fronts and new office windows she saw the welcome names of men she knew but more oftenthe names were unfamiliar, especially the dozens of shingles of strange doctors and lawyers andcotton merchants. Once she had known practically everyone in Atlanta and the sight of so manystrange names depressed her. But she was cheered by the sight of new buildings going up all alongthe street.

There were dozens of them and several were three stories high! Everywhere building was goingon, for as she looked down the street, trying to adjust her mind to the new Atlanta, she heard theblithe sound of hammers and saws, noticed scaffoldings rising and saw men climbing ladders withhods of bricks on their shoulders. She looked down the street she loved so well and her eyes misteda little.

They burned you, she thought, and they laid you flat. But they didnt lick you. They couldntlick you. Youll grow back just as big and sassy as you used to be!

As she walked along Peachtree, followed by the waddling Mammy, she found the sidewalks justas crowded as they were at the height of the war and there was the same air of rush and bustleabout the resurrecting town which had made her blood sing when she came here, so long ago, onher first visit to Aunt Pitty. There seemed to be just as many vehicles wallowing in the mud holesas there had been then, except that there were no Confederate ambulances, and just as many horsesand mules tethered to hitching racks in front of the wooden awnings of the stores. Though thesidewalks were jammed, the faces she saw were as unfamiliar as the signs overhead, new people,many rough-looking men and tawdrily dressed women. The streets were black with loafing negroes who leaned against walls or sat on the curbing watching vehicles go past with the na.vecuriosity of children at a circus parade.

Free issue country niggers, snorted Mammy. Ain never seed a proper cahige in dere lives.

An impident lookin, too.

They were impudent looking, Scarlett agreed, for they stared at her in an insolent manner, butshe forgot them in the renewed shock of seeing blue uniforms. The town was full of Yankeesoldiers, on horses, afoot, in army wagons, loafing on the street, reeling out of barrooms.

Ill never get used to them, she thought, clenching her fists. Never! and over her shoulder:

Hurry, Mammy, lets get out of this crowd.

Soons Ah kick dis black trash outer mah way, answered Mammy loudly, swinging thecarpetbag at a black buck who loitered tantalizingly in front of her and making him leap aside. Ahdoan lak disyere town, Miss Scarlett. Its too full of Yankees an cheap free issue.

Its nicer where it isnt so crowded. When we get across Five Points, it wont be so bad.

They picked their way across the slippery stepping stones that bridged the mud of Decatur Streetand continued up Peachtree, through a thinning crowd. When they reached Wesley Chapel whereScarlett had paused to catch her breath that day in 1864 when she had run for Dr. Meade, shelooked at it and laughed aloud, shortly and grimly. Mammys quick old eyes sought hers with suspicionand question but her curiosity went unsatisfied. Scarlett was recalling with contempt theterror which had ridden her that day. She had been crawling with fear, rotten with fear, terrified bythe Yankees, terrified by the approaching birth of Beau. Now she wondered how she could havebeen so frightened, frightened like a child at a loud noise. And what a child she had been to thinkthat Yankees and fire and defeat were the worst things that could happen to her! What trivialitiesthey were beside Ellens death and Geralds vagueness, beside hunger and cold and back-breakingwork and the living nightmare of insecurity. How easy she would find it now to be brave before aninvading army, but how hard to face the danger that threatened Tara! No, she would never again beafraid of anything except poverty.

Up Peachtree came a closed carriage and Scarlett went to the curb eagerly to see if she knew theoccupant, for Aunt Pittys house was still several blocks away. She and Mammy leaned forward asthe carriage came abreast and Scarlett, with a smile arranged, almost called out when a womanshead appeared for a moment at the windowa too bright red head beneath a fine fur hat. Scarletttook a step back as mutual recognition leaped into both faces. It was Belle Watling and Scarlett hada glimpse of nostrils distended with dislike before she disappeared again. Strange that Bellesshould be the first familiar face she saw.

Who dat? questioned Mammy suspiciously. She knowed you but she din bow. Ah ain neverseed har dat color in mah life. Not even in de Tarleton fambly. It lookwell, it look dyed ter me!

It is, said Scarlett shortly, walking faster.

Does you know a dyed-hard woman? Ah ast you who she is.

Shes the town bad woman, said Scarlett briefly, and I give you my word I dont know her, soshut up.

Gawdlmighty! breathed Mammy, her jaw dropping as she looked after the carriage withpassionate curiosity. She had not seen a professional bad woman since she left Savannah withEllen more than twenty years before and she wished ardently that she had observed Belle moreclosely.

She sho dressed up fine an got a fine cahige an coachman, she muttered. Ah doan knowwhut de Lawd thinkin bout lettin de bad women flurrish lak dat wen us good folks is hongry an

mos barefoot.

The Lord stopped thinking about us years ago, said Scarlett savagely. And dont go tellingme Mother is turning in her grave to hear me say it, either.

She wanted to feel superior and virtuous about Belle but she could not. If her plans went well,she might be on the same footing with Belle and supported by the same man. While she did notregret her decision one whit, the matter in its true light discomfited her. I wont think of it now,

she told herself and hurried her steps.

They passed the lot where the Meade house had stood and there remained of it only a forlornpair of stone steps and a walk, leading up to nothing. Where the Whitings home had been was bareground. Even the foundation stones and the brick chimneys were gone and there were wagontracks where they had been carted away. The brick house of the Elsings still stood, with a new roofand a new second floor. The Bonnell home, awkwardly patched and roofed with rude boardsinstead of shingles, managed to look livable for all its battered appearance. But in neither housewas there a face at the window or a figure on the porch, and Scarlett was glad. She did not want totalk to anyone now.

Then the new slate roof of Aunt Pittys house came in view with its red-brick walls, andScarletts heart throbbed. How good of the Lord not to level it beyond repair! Coming out of thefront yard was Uncle Peter, a market basket on his arm, and when he saw Scarlett and Mammytrudging along, a wide, incredulous smile split his black face.

I could kiss the old black fool, Im so glad to see him, thought Scarlett, joyfully and she called:

Run get Aunties swoon bottle, Peter! Its really me!

That night the inevitable hominy and dried peas were on Aunt Pittys supper table and, asScarlett ate them, she made a vow that these two dishes would never appear on her table when shehad money again. And, no matter what price she had to pay, she was going to have money again,more than just enough to pay the taxes on Tara. Somehow, some day she was going to have plentyof money if she had to commit murder to get it.

In the yellow lamplight of the dining room, she asked Pitty about her finances, hoping againsthope that Charles family might be able to lend her the money she needed. The questions werenone too subtle but Pitty, in her pleasure at having a member of the family to talk to, did not evennotice the bald way the questions were put. She plunged with tears into the details of hermisfortunes. She just didnt know where her farms and town property and money had gone buteverything had slipped away. At least, that was what Brother Henry told her. He hadnt been ableto pay the taxes on her estate. Everything except the house she was living in was gone and Pitty did not stop to think that the house had never been hers but was the joint property of Melanie andScarlett. Brother Henry could just barely pay taxes on this house. He gave her a little somethingevery month to live on and, though it was very humiliating to take money from him, she had to doit.

Brother Henry says he doesnt know how hell make ends meet with the load hes carrying andthe taxes so high but, of course, hes probably lying and has loads of money and just wont give memuch.

Scarlett knew Uncle Henry wasnt lying. The few letters she had had from him in connectionwith Charles property showed that. The old lawyer was battling valiantly to save the house and theone piece of downtown property where the warehouse had been, so Wade and Scarlett would havesomething left from the wreckage. Scarlett knew he was carrying these taxes for her at a greatsacrifice.

Of course, he hasnt any money, thought Scarlett grimly. Well, check him and Aunt Pitty offmy list. Theres nobody left but Rhett. Ill have to do it. I must do it. But I mustnt think about itnow. ... I must get her to talking about Rhett so I can casually suggest to her to invite him to calltomorrow.

She smiled and squeezed the plump palms of Aunt Pitty between her own.

Darling Auntie, she said, dont lets talk about distressing things like money any more. Letsforget about them and talk of pleasanter things. You must tell me all the news about our oldfriends. How is Mrs. Merriwether, and Maybelle? I heard that Maybelles little Creole came homesafely. How are the Elsings and Dr. and Mrs. Meade?

Pittypat brightened at the change of subject and her baby face stopped quivering with tears. Shegave detailed reports about old neighbors, what they were doing and wearing and eating andthinking. She told with accents of horror how, before Ren Picard came home from the war, Mrs.

Merriwether and Maybelle had made ends meet by baking pies and selling them to the Yankeesoldiers. Imagine that! Sometimes there were two dozen Yankees standing in the back yard of theMerriwether home, waiting for the baking to be finished. Now that Ren was home, he drove anold wagon to the Yankee camp every day and sold cakes and pies and beaten biscuits to the soldiers.

Mrs. Merriwether said that when she made a little more money she was going to open a bakeshop downtown. Pitty did not wish to criticize but after all As for herself, said Pitty, she wouldrather starve than have such commerce with Yankees. She made a point of giving a disdainful lookto every soldier she met, and crossed to the other side of the street in as insulting a manner aspossible, though, she said, this was quite inconvenient in wet weather. Scarlett gathered that nosacrifice, even though it be muddy shoes, was too great to show loyalty to the Confederacy, in sofar as Miss Pittypat was concerned.

Mrs. Meade and the doctor had lost their home when the Yankees fired the town and they hadneither the money nor the heart to rebuild, now that Phil and Darcy were dead. Mrs. Meade saidshe never wanted a home again, for what was a home without children and grandchildren in it?

They were very lonely and had gone to live with the Elsings who had rebuilt the damaged part oftheir home. Mr. and Mrs. Whiting had a room there, too, and Mrs. Bonnell was talking of movingin, if she was fortunate enough to rent her house to a Yankee officer and his family.

But how do they all squeeze in? cried Scarlett Theres Mrs. Elsing and Fanny and Hugh

Mrs. Elsing and Fanny sleep in the parlor and Hugh in the attic, explained Pitty, who knew thedomestic arrangements of all her friends. My dear, I do hate to tell you this butMrs. Elsing callsthem paying guests but, Pitty dropped her voice, they are really nothing at all except boarders.

Mrs. Elsing is running a boarding house! Isnt that dreadful?

I think its wonderful, said Scarlett shortly. I only wish wed had paying guests at Tara forthe last year instead of free boarders. Maybe we wouldnt be so poor now.

Scarlett, how can you say such things? Your poor mother must be turning in her grave at thevery thought of charging money for the hospitality of Tara! Of course, Mrs. Elsing was simplyforced to it because, while she took in fine sewing and Fanny painted china and Hugh made a littlemoney peddling firewood, they couldnt make ends meet. Imagine darling Hugh forced to peddlewood! And he all set to be a fine lawyer! I could just cry at the things our boys are reduced to!

Scarlett thought of the rows of cotton beneath the glaring coppery sky at Tara and how her backhad ached she bent over them. She remembered the feel of plow handles between herinexperienced, (as) blistered palms and she felt that Hugh Elsing was deserving of no special sympathy.

What an innocent old fool Pitty was and, despite the ruin all around her, how sheltered!

If he doesnt like peddling, why doesnt He practice law? Or isnt there any law practice left inAtlanta?

Oh dear, yes! Theres plenty of law practice. Practically everybody is suing everybody elsethese days. With everything burned down and boundary lines wiped out, no one knows just wheretheir land begins or ends. But you cant get any pay for suing because nobody has any money. SoHugh sticks to his peddling. ... Oh, I almost forgot! Did I write you? Fanny Elsing is gettingmarried tomorrow night and, of course, you must attend. Mrs. Elsing will be only too pleased tohave you when she knows youre in town. I do hope you have some other frock besides that one.

Not that it isnt a very sweet frock, darling, butwell, it does look a bit worn. Oh, you have apretty frock? Im so glad because its going to be the first real wedding weve had in Atlanta sincebefore the town fell. Cake and wine and dancing afterward, though I dont know how the Elsingscan afford it, they are so poor.

Who is Fanny marrying? I thought after Dallas McLure was killed at Gettysburg

Darling, you mustnt criticize Fanny. Everybody isnt as loyal to the dead as you are to poorCharlie. Let me see. What is his name? I can never remember namesTom somebody. I knew hismother well, went to La-Grange Female Institute together. She a Tomlinson from LaGrange and her(we) mother wasletmesee.... Perkins?Parkins? Parkinson!Th(was) ats it. From Sparta.

A very good family but just the samewell, I know I shouldnt say it but I dont see how Fannycan bring herself to marry him!

Does he drink or

Dear, no! His character is perfect but, you see, he was wounded low down, by a bursting shelland it did something to his legsmakes themmakes them, well, I hate to use the word but itmakes him spraddle. It gives him a very vulgar appearance when he walkswell, it doesnt lookvery pretty. I dont see why shes marrying him.

Girls have to marry someone.

Indeed, they do not, said Pitty, ruffling. I never had to.

Now, darling, I didnt mean you! Everybody knows how popular you were and still are! Why,old Judge Carlton used to throw sheeps eyes at you till I

Oh, Scarlett, hush! That old fool! giggled Pitty, good humor restored. But, after all, Fannywas so popular she could have made a better match and I dont believe she loves this Tom whatshis-name. I dont believe shes ever gotten over Dallas McLure getting killed, but shes not likeyou, darling. Youve remained so faithful to dear Charlie, though you could have married dozensof times. Melly and I have often said how loyal you were to his memory when everyone else saidyou were just a heartless coquette.

Scarlett passed over this tactless confidence and skillfully led Pitty from one friend to anotherbut all the while she was in a fever of impatience to bring the conversation around to Rhett. Itwould never do for her to ask outright about him, so soon after arriving. It might start the oldladys mind to working on channels better left untouched. There would be time enough for Pittyssuspicions to be aroused if Rhett refused to marry her.

Aunt Pitty prattled on happily, pleased as a child at having an audience. Things in Atlanta werein a dreadful pass, she said, due to the vile doings of the Republicans. There was no end to theirgoings on and the worst thing was the way they were putting ideas in the poor darkies heads.

My dear, they want to let the darkies vote! Did you ever hear of anything more silly? ThoughI dont knownow that I think about it, Uncle Peter has much more sense than any Republican Iever saw and much better manners but, of course, Uncle Peter is far too well bred to want to vote.

But the very notion has upset the darkies till theyre right addled. And some of them are soinsolent. Your life isnt safe on the streets after dark and even in the broad daylight they pushladies off the sidewalks into the mud. And if any gentleman dares to protest, they arrest him andMy dear, did I tell you that Captain Butler was in jail?

Rhett Butler?

Even with this startling news, Scarlett was grateful that Aunt Pitty had saved her the necessity ofbringing his name into the conversation herself.

Yes, indeed! Excitement colored Pittys cheeks pink and she sat upright. Hes in jail this veryminute for killing a negro and they may hang him! Imagine Captain Butler hanging!

For a moment, the breath went out of Scarletts lungs in a sickening gasp and she could onlystare at the fat old lady who was so obviously pleased at the effect of her statement.

They havent proved it yet but somebody killed this darky who had insulted a white woman.

And the Yankees are very upset because so many uppity darkies have been killed recently. Theycant prove it on Captain Butler but they want to make an example of someone, so Dr. Meade says.

The doctor says that if they do hang him it will be the first good honest job the Yankees ever did,but then, I dont know. ... And to think that Captain Butler was here just a week ago and broughtme the loveliest quail you ever saw for a present and he was asking about you and saying he fearedhe had offended you during the siege and you would never forgive him.

How long will he be in jail?

Nobody knows. Perhaps till they hang him, but maybe they wont be able to prove the killingon him, after all. However, it doesnt seem to bother the Yankees whether folks are guilty or not, solong as they can hang somebody. They are so upsetPitty dropped her voice mysteriouslyabout the Ku Klux Klan. Do you have the Klan down in the County? My dear, Im sure youmust and Ashley just doesnt tell you girls anything about it Klansmen arent supposed to tell.

They ride around at night dressed up like ghosts and call on Carpetbaggers who steal money andnegroes who are uppity. Sometimes they just scare them and warn them to leave Atlanta, but whenthey dont behave they whip them and, Pitty whispered, sometimes they kill them and leavethem where theyll be easily found with the Ku Klux card on them. ... And the Yankees are veryangry about it and want to make an example of someone. ... But Hugh Elsing told me he didntthink theyd hang Captain Butler because the Yankees think he does know where the money is andjust wont tell. They are trying to make him tell.

The money?

Didnt you know? Didnt I write you? My dear, you have been buried at Tara, havent you? Thetown simply buzzed when Captain Butler came back here with a fine horse and carriage and hispockets full of money, when all the rest of us didnt know where our next meal was coming from.

It simply made everybody furious that an old speculator who always said nasty things about theConfederacy should have so much money when we were all so poor. Everybody was bursting toknow how he managed to save his money but no one had the courage to ask himexcept me andhe just laughed and said: In no honest way, you may be sure. You know how hard it is to getanything sensible out of him.

But of course, he made his money out of the blockade

Of course, he did, honey, some of it. But thats not a drop in the bucket to what that man hasreally got. Everybody, including the Yankees, believes hes got millions of dollars in goldbelonging to the Confederate government hid out somewhere.

Millionsin gold?

Well, honey, where did all our Confederate gold go to? Somebody got it and Captain Butlermust be one of the somebodies. The Yankees thought President Davis had it when he leftRichmond but when they captured the poor man he had hardly a cent. There just wasnt any moneyin the treasury when the war was over and everybody thinks some of the blockade runners got itand are keeping quiet about it.

Millionsin gold! But how

Didnt Captain Butler take thousands of bales of cotton to England and Nassau to sell for theConfederate government? asked Pitty triumphantly. Not only his own cotton but governmentcotton too? And you know what cotton brought in England during the war! Any price you wantedto ask! He was a free agent acting for the government and he was supposed to sell the cotton andbuy guns with the money and run the guns in for us. Well, when the blockade got too tight, hecouldnt bring in the guns and he couldnt have spent one one-hundredth of the cotton money onthem anyway, so there were simply millions of dollars in English banks put there by Captain Butler and other blockaders, waiting till the blockade loosened. And you cant tell me they banked thatmoney in the name of the Confederacy. They put it in their own names and its still there. ...

Everybody has been talking about it ever since the surrender and criticizing the blockadersseverely, and when the Yankees arrested Captain Butler for killing this darky they must have heardthe rumor, because theyve been at him to tell them where the money is. You see, all of ourConfederate funds belong to the Yankees nowat least, the Yankees think so. But Captain Butlersays he doesnt know anything. ... Dr. Meade says they ought to hang him anyhow, only hanging istoo good for a thief and a profiteer Dear, you look so oddly! Do you feel faint? Have I upset youtalking like this? I knew he was once a beau of yours but I thought youd fallen out long ago.

Personally, I never approved of him, for hes such a scamp

Hes no friend of mine, said Scarlett with an effort. I had a quarrel with him during the siege,after you went to Macon. Wherewhere is he?

In the firehouse over near the public square!

In the firehouse?

Aunt Pitty crowed with laughter.

Yes, hes in the firehouse. The Yankees use it for a military jail now. The Yankees are campedin huts all round the city hall in the square and the firehouse is just down the street, so thats whereCaptain Butler is. And Scarlett, I heard the funniest thing yesterday about Captain Butler. I forgetwho told me. You know how well groomed he always wasreally a dandyand theyve beenkeeping him in the firehouse and not letting him bathe and every day hes been insisting that hewanted a bath and finally they led him out of his cell onto the square and there was a long, horsetrough where the whole regiment had bathed in the same water! And they told him he could bathethere and he said No, that he preferred his own brand of Southern dirt to Yankee dirt and

Scarlett heard the cheerful babbling voice going on and on but she did not hear the words. In hermind there were only two ideas, Rhett had more money than she had even hoped and he was injail. The fact that he was in jail and possibly might be hanged changed the face of matterssomewhat, in fact made them look a little brighter. She had very little feeling about Rhett beinghanged. Her need of money was too pressing, too desperate, for her to bother about his ultimatefate. Besides, she half shared Dr. Meades opinion that hanging was too good for him. Any manwhod leave a woman stranded between two armies in the middle of the night, just to go off andfight for a Cause already lost, deserved hanging. ... If she could somehow manage to marry himwhile he was in jail, all those millions would be hers and hers alone should he be executed. And ifmarriage was not possible, perhaps she could get a loan from him by promising to marry him whenhe was released or by promisingoh, promising anything! And if they hanged him, her day ofsettlement would never come.

For a moment her imagination flamed at the thought of being made a widow by the kindlyintervention of the Yankee government. Millions in gold! She could repair Tara and hire hands andplant miles and miles of cotton. And she could have pretty clothes and all she wanted to eat and socould Suellen and Carreen. And Wade could have nourishing food to fill out his thin cheeks andwarm clothes and a governess and afterward go to the university ... and not grow up barefootedand ignorant like a Cracker. And a good doctor could look after Pa and as for Ashleywhat couldnt she do for Ashley!

Aunt Pittypats monologue broke off suddenly as she said inquiringly: Yes, Mammy? andScarlett, coming back from dreams, saw Mammy standing in the doorway, her hands under herapron and in her eyes an alert piercing look. She wondered how long Mammy had been standingthere and how much she had heard and observed. Probably everything, to judge by the gleam inher old eyes.

Miss Scarlett look lak she tared. Ah spec she better go ter bed.

I am tired, said Scarlett, rising and meeting Mammys eyes with a childlike, helpless look,and Im afraid Im catching a cold too. Aunt Pitty, would you mind if I stayed in bed tomorrowand didnt go calling with you? I can go calling any time and Im so anxious to go to Fannyswedding tomorrow night. And if my cold gets worse I wont be able to go. And a day in bed wouldbe such a lovely treat for me.

Mammys look changed to faint worry as she felt Scarletts hands and looked into her face. Shecertainly didnt look well. The excitement of her thoughts had abruptly ebbed, leaving her whiteand shaking.

Yo hans lak ice, honey. You come ter bed an Ahll brew you some sassfrass tea an git you ahot brick ter mek you sweat.

How thoughtless Ive been, cried the plump old lady, hopping from her chair and pattingScarletts arm. Just chattering on and not thinking of you. Honey, you shall stay in bed alltomorrow and rest up and we can gossip together Oh, dear, no! I cant be with you. Ive promisedto sit with Mrs. Bonnell tomorrow. She is down with la grippe and so is her cook. Mammy,Im so glad you are here. You must go over with me in the morning and help me.

Mammy hurried Scarlett up the dark stairs, muttering fussy remarks about cold hands and thinshoes and Scarlett looked meek and was well content. If she could only lull Mammys suspicionsfurther and get her out of the house in the morning, all would be well. Then she could go to theYankee jail and see Rhett. As she climbed the stairs, the faint rumbling of thunder began and,standing on the well-remembered landing, she thought how like the siege cannon it sounded. Sheshivered. Forever, thunder would mean cannon and war to her.

Chapter 34

THE SUN SHONE intermittently the next morning and the hard wind that drove dark cloudsswiftly across its face rattled the windowpanes and moaned faintly about the house. Scarlett said abrief prayer of thanksgiving that the rain of the previous night had ceased, for she had lain awakelistening to it, knowing that it would mean the ruin of her velvet dress and new bonnet. Now thatshe could catch fleeting glimpses of the sun, her spirits soared. She could hardly remain in bed andlook languid and make croaking noises until Aunt Pitty, Mammy and Uncle Peter were out of thehouse and on their way to Mrs. Bonnells. When, at last, the front gate banged and she was alone inthe house, except for Cookie who was singing in the kitchen, she leaped from the bed and liftedher new clothes from the closet hooks.

Sleep had refreshed her and given her strength and from the cold hard core at the bottom of herheart, she drew courage. There was something about the prospect of a straggle of wits with a manwith any manthat put her on her mettle and, after months of battling against countlessdiscouragements, the knowledge that she was at last facing a definite adversary, one whom shemight unhorse by her own efforts, gave her a buoyant sensation.

Dressing unaided was difficult but she finally accomplished it and putting on the bonnet with itsrakish feathers she ran to Aunt Pittys room to preen herself in front of the long mirror. How prettyshe looked! The cock feathers gave her a dashing air and the dull-green velvet of the bonnet madeher eyes startlingly bright, almost emerald colored. And the dress was incomparable, so rich andhandsome looking and yet so dignified! It was wonderful to have a lovely dress again. It was sonice to know that she looked pretty and provocative, and she impulsively bent forward and kissedher reflection in the mirror and then laughed at her own foolishness. She picked up Ellens Paisleyshawl to wrap about her but the colors of the faded old square clashed with the moss-green dressand made her appear a little shabby. Opening Aunt Pittys closet she removed a black broadclothcloak, a thin fall garment which Pitty used only for Sunday wear, and put it on. She slipped intoher pierced ears the diamond earrings she had brought from Tara, and tossed her head to observethe effect. They made pleasant clicking noises which were very satisfactory and she thought thatshe must remember to toss her head frequently when with Rhett. Dancing earrings always attracteda man and gave a girl such a spirited air.

What a shame Aunt Pitty had no other gloves than the ones now on her fat hands! No womancould really feel like a lady without gloves, but Scarlett had not had a pair since she left Atlanta.

And the long months of hard work at Tara had roughened her hands until they were far from pretty.

Well, it couldnt be helped. Shed take Aunt Pittys little seal muff and hide her bare hands in itScarlett felt that it gave her the final finishing touch of elegance. No one, looking at her now,would suspect that poverty and want were standing at her shoulder.

It was so important that Rhett should not suspect. He must not think that anything but tenderfeelings were driving her.

She tiptoed down the stairs and out of the house while Cookie bawled on unconcernedly in thekitchen. She hastened down Baker Street to avoid the all seeing eyes of the neighbors and sat downon a carriage block on Ivy Street in front of a burned house, to wait for some passing carriage orwagon which would give her a ride. The sun dipped in and out from behind hurrying clouds,lighting the street with a false brightness which had no warmth in it, and the wind fluttered the laceof her pantalets. It was colder than she had expected and she wrapped Aunt Pittys thin cloak abouther and shivered impatiently. Just as she was preparing to start walking the long way across townto the Yankee encampment, a battered wagon appeared. In it was an old woman with a lip full ofsnuff and a weather-beaten face under a drab sunbonnet, driving a dawdling old mule. She wasgoing in the direction of the city hall and she grudgingly gave Scarlett a ride. But it was obviousthat the dress, bonnet and muff found no favor with her.

She thinks Im a hussy, thought Scarlett And perhaps shes right at that!

When at last they reached the town square and the tall white cupola of the city hall loomed up,she made her thanks, climbed down from the wagon and watched the country woman drive off.

Looking around carefully to see that she was not observed, she pinched her cheeks to give themcolor and bit her lips until they stung to make them red. She adjusted the bonnet and smoothedback her hair and looked about the square. The two-story red-brick city hall had survived theburning of the city. But it looked forlorn and unkempt under the gray sky. Surrounding the buildingcompletely and covering the square of land of which it was the center were row after row of armyhuts, dingy and mud splashed. Yankee soldiers loitered everywhere and Scarlett looked at themuncertainly, some of her courage deserting her. How would she go about finding Rhett in thisenemy camp?

She looked down the street toward the firehouse and saw that the wide arched doors were closedand heavily barred and two sentries passed and repassed on each side of the building. Rhett was inthere. But what should she say to the Yankee soldiers? And what would they say to her? Shesquared her shoulders. If she hadnt been afraid to kill one Yankee, she shouldnt fear merelytalking to another.

She picked her way precariously across the stepping stones of the muddy street and walkedforward until a sentry, his blue overcoat buttoned high against the wind, stopped her.

What is it, Mam? His voice had a strange mid-Western twang but it was polite and respectful.

I want to see a man in therehe is a prisoner.

Well, I dont know, said the sentry, scratching his head. They are mighty particular aboutvisitors and He stopped and peered into her face sharply. Lord, lady! Dont you cry! You goover to post headquarters and ask the officers. Theyll let you see him, I bet.

Scarlett, who had no intention of crying, beamed at him. He turned to another sentry who wasslowly pacing his beat: Yee-ah, Bill. Comeeer.

The second sentry, a large man muffled in a blue overcoat from which villainous black whiskersburst, came through the mud toward them.

You take this lady to headquarters.

Scarlett thanked him and followed the sentry.

Mind you dont turn your ankle on those stepping stones, said the soldier, taking her arm.

And youd better hist up your skirts a little to keep them out of the mud.

The voice issuing from the whiskers had the same nasal twang but was kind and pleasant and hishand was firm and respectful. Why, Yankees werent bad at all!

Its a mighty cold day for a lady to be out in, said her escort. Have you come a fer piece?

Oh, yes, from clear across the other side of town, she said, warming to the kindness in hisvoice.

This aint no weather for a lady to be out in, said the soldier reprovingly, with all this lagrippe in the air. Heres Post Command, lady Whats the matter?

This housethis house is your headquarters? Scarlett looked up at the lovely old dwellingfacing on the square and could have cried. She had been to so many parties in this house during thewar. It had been a gay beautiful place and nowthere was a large United States flag floating over it.

Whats the matter?

NothingonlyonlyI used to know the people who lived here.

Well, thats too bad. I guess they wouldnt know it themselves if they saw it, for it shore is tornup on the inside. Now, you go on in, Mam, and ask for the captain.

She went up the steps, caressing the broken white banisters, and pushed open the front door. Thehall was dark and as cold as a vault and a shivering sentry was leaning against the closed foldingdoors of what had been, in better days, the dining room.

I want to see the captain, she said.

He pulled back the doors and she entered the room, her heart beating rapidly, her face flushingwith embarrassment and excitement. There was a close stuffy smell in the room, compounded ofthe smoking fire, tobacco fames, leather, damp woolen uniforms and unwashed bodies. She had aconfused impression of bare walls with torn wallpaper, rows of blue overcoats and slouch hatshung on nails, a roaring fire, a long table covered with papers and a group of officers in blueuniforms with brass buttons.

She gulped once and found her voice. She mustnt let these Yankees know she was afraid. Shemust look and be her prettiest and most unconcerned self. The captain?

Im one captain, said a fat man whose tunic was unbuttoned.

I want to see a prisoner, Captain Rhett Butler.

Butler again? Hes popular, that man, laughed the captain, taking a chewed cigar from hismouth. You a relative, Mam?

Yeshishis sister.

He laughed again.

Hes got a lot of sisters, one of them here yesterday.

Scarlett flushed. One of those creatures Rhett consorted with, probably that Watling woman.

And these Yankees thought she was another one. It was unendurable. Not even for Tara would shestay here another minute and be insulted. She turned to the door and reached angrily for the knobbut another officer was by her side quickly. He was clean shaven and young and had merry, kindeyes.

Just a minute, Mam. Wont you sit down here by the fire where its warm? Ill go see what Ican do about it. What is your name? He refused to see thelady who called yesterday.

She sank into the proffered chair, glaring at the discomfited fat captain, and gave her name. Thenice young officer slipped on his overcoat and left the room and the others took themselves off tothe far end of the table where they talked in low tones and pawed at the papers. She stretched herfeet gratefully toward the fire, realizing for the first time how cold they were and wishing she hadthought to put a piece of cardboard over the hole in the sole of one slipper. After a time, voicesmurmured outside the door and she heard Rhetts laugh. The door opened, a cold draft swept the room and Rhett appeared, hatless, a long cape thrown carelessly across his shoulders. He was dirtyand unshaven and without a cravat but somehow jaunty despite his dishabille, and his dark eyeswere snapping joyfully at the sight of her.

Scarlett!

He had her hands in both of his and, as always, there was something hot and vital and excitingabout his grip. Before she quite knew what he was about, he had bent and kissed her cheek, hismustache tickling her. As he felt the startled movement of her body away from him, he hugged herabout the shoulders and said: My darling little sister! and grinned down at her as if he relishedher helplessness in resisting his caress. She couldnt help laughing back at him for the advantagehe had taken. What a rogue he was! Jail had not changed him one bit.

The fat captain was muttering through his cigar to the merry-eyed officer.

Most irregular. He should be in the firehouse. You know the orders.

Oh, for Gods sake, Henry! The lady would freeze in that barn.

Oh, all right, all right! Its your responsibility.

I assure you, gentlemen, said Rhett, turning to them but still keeping a grip on Scarlettsshoulders, mysister hasnt brought me any saws or files to help me escape.

They all laughed and, as they did, Scarlett looked quickly about her. Good Heavens, was shegoing to have to talk to Rhett before six Yankee officers! Was he so dangerous a prisoner theywouldnt let him out of their sight? Seeing her anxious glance, the nice officer pushed open a doorand spoke brief low words to two privates who had leaped to their feet at his entrance. They pickedup their rifles and went out into the hall, closing the door behind them.

If you wish, you may sit here in the orderly room, said the young captain, And dont try tobolt through that door. The men are just outside.

You see what a desperate character I am, Scarlett, said Rhett Thank you, Captain. This ismost kind of you.

He bowed carelessly and taking Scarletts arm pulled her to her feet and propelled her into thedingy orderly room. She was never to remember what the room looked like except that it wassmall and dim and none too warm and there were handwritten papers tacked on the mutilated wallsand chairs which had cowhide seats with the hair still on them.

When he had closed the door behind them. Rhett came to her swiftly and bent over her.

Knowing his desire, she turned her head quickly but smiled provocatively at him out of the cornersof her eyes.

Cant I really kiss you now?

On the forehead, like a good brother, she answered demurely.

Thank you, no. I prefer to wait and hope for better things. His eyes sought her lips andlingered there a moment. But how good of you to come to see me, Scarlett! You are the firstrespectable citizen who has called on me since my incarceration, and being in jail makes oneappreciate friends. When did you come to town?

Yesterday afternoon.

And you came out this morning? Why, my dear, you are more than good. He smiled down ather with the first expression of honest pleasure she had ever seen on his face. Scarlett smiledinwardly with excitement and ducked her head as if embarrassed.

Of course, I came out right away. Aunt Pitty told me about you last night and II just couldntsleep all night for thinking how awful it was. Rhett, Im so distressed!

Why, Scarlett!

His voice was soft but there was a vibrant note in it, and looking up into his dark face she saw init none of the skepticism, the jeering humor she knew so well. Before his direct gaze her eyes fellagain in real confusion. Things were going even better than she hoped.

Its worth being in jail to see you again and to hear you say things like that. I really couldntbelieve my ears when they brought me your name. You see, I never expected you to forgive me formy patriotic conduct that night on the road near Rough and Ready. But I take it that this call meansyou have forgiven me?

She could feel swift anger stir, even at this late date, as she thought of that night but she subduedit and tossed her head until the earrings danced.

No, I havent forgiven you, she said and pouted.

Another hope crushed. And after I offered up myself for my country and fought barefooted inthe snow at Franklin and got the finest case of dysentery you ever heard of for my pains!

I dont want to hear about yourpains, she said, still pouting hut smiling at him from tip-tilted eyes. I still think you were hateful that night and I never expect to forgive you. Leaving mealone like that when anything might have happened to me!

But nothing did happen to you. So, you see, my confidence in you was justified. I knew youdget home safely and God help any Yankee who got in your way!

Rhett, why on earth did you do such a silly thingenlisting at the last minute when you knewwe were going to get licked? And after all youd said about idiots who went out and got shot!

Scarlett, spare me! I am always overcome with shame when I think about it.

Well, Im glad to learn you are ashamed of the way you treated me.

You misunderstand. I regret to say that my conscience has not troubled me at all aboutdeserting you. But as for enlistingwhen I think of joining the army in varnished boots and awhite linen suit and armed with only a pair of dueling pistols And those long cold miles in thesnow after my boots wore out and I had no overcoat and nothing to eat ... I cannot understand whyI did not desert. It was all the purest insanity. But its in ones blood. Southerners can never resist alosing cause. But never mind my reasons. Its enough that Im forgiven.

Youre not. I think youre a hound. But she caressed the last word until it might have beendarling.

Dont fib. Youve forgiven me. Young ladies dont dare Yankee sentries to see a prisoner, just for charitys sweet sake, and come all dressed up in velvet and feathers and seal muffs too. Scarlett,how pretty you look! Thank God, you arent in rags or mourning! I get so sick of women in dowdyold clothes and perpetual crpe. You look like the Rue de la Paix. Turn around, my dear, and let melook at you.

So he had noticed the dress. Of course, he would notice such things, being Rhett. She laughed insoft excitement and spun about on her toes, her arms extended, her hoops tilting up to show herlace trimmed pantalets. His black eyes took her in from bonnet to heels in a glance that missednothing, that old impudent unclothing glance which always gave her goose bumps.

You look very prosperous and very, very tidy. And almost good enough to eat. If it wasnt forthe Yankees outsidebut you are quite safe, my dear. Sit down. I wont take advantage of you as Idid the last time I saw you. He rubbed his cheek with pseudo ruefulness. Honestly, Scarlett,dont you think you were a bit selfish, that night? Think of all I had done for you, risked my lifestolen a horseand such a horse! Rushed to the defense of Our Glorious Cause! And what did Iget for my pains? Some hard words and a very hard slap in the face.

She sat down. The conversation was not going in quite the direction she hoped. He had seemedso nice when he first saw her, so genuinely glad she had come. He had almost seemed like ahuman being and not the perverse wretch she knew so well.

Must you always get something for your pains?

Why, of course! I am a monster of selfishness, as you ought to know. I always expect paymentfor anything I give.

That sent a slight chill through her but she rallied and jingled her earbobs again.

Oh, you really arent so bad, Rhett. You just like to show off.

My word, but you have changed! he said and laughed. What has made a Christian of you? Ihave kept up with you through Miss Pittypat but she gave me no intimation that you had developedwomanly sweetness. Tell me more about yourself, Scarlett. What have you been doing since I lastsaw you?

The old irritation and antagonism which he roused in her was hot in her heart and she yearned tospeak tart words. But she smiled instead and the dimple crept into her cheek. He had drawn a chairclose beside hers and she leaned over and put a gentle hand on his arm, in an unconscious manner.

Oh, Ive been doing nicely, thank you, and everything at Tara is fine now. Of course, we had adreadful time right after Sherman went through but, after all, he didnt burn the house and thedarkies saved most of the livestock by driving it into the swamp. And we cleared a fair crop thislast fall, twenty bales. Of course, thats practically nothing compared with what Tara can do but wehavent many field hands. Pa says, of course, well do better next year. But, Rhett, its so dull inthe country now! Imagine, there arent any balls or barbecues and the only thing people talk aboutis hard times! Goodness, I get sick of it! Finally last week I got too bored to stand it any longer, soPa said I must take a trip and have a good time. So I came up here to get me some frocks made andthen Im going over to Charleston to visit my aunt. Itll be lovely to go to balls again.

There, she thought with pride, I delivered that with just the right airy way! Not too rich but certainly not poor.

You look beautiful in ball dresses, my dear, and you know it too, worse luck! I suppose the realreason you are going, visiting is that you have run through the County swains and are seeking freshones in fields afar.

Scarlett had a thankful thought that Rhett had spent the last several months abroad and had onlyrecently come back to Atlanta. Otherwise, he would never have made so ridiculous a statement.

She thought briefly of the County swains, the ragged embittered little Fontaines, the poverty-stricken Munroe boys, the Jonesboro and Fayetteville beaux who were so busy plowing, splittingrails and nursing sick old animals that they had forgotten such things as balls and pleasantflirtations ever existed. But she put down this memory and giggled self-consciously as if admittingthe truth of his assertion.

Oh, well, she said deprecatingly.

You are a heartless creature, Scarlett, but perhaps thats part of your charm. He smiled in hisold way, one corner of his mouth curving down, but she knew he was complimenting her. For, ofcourse, you know you have more charm than the law should permit. Even I have felt it, casehardenedthough I am. Ive often wondered what it was about you that made me always rememberyou, for Ive known many ladies who were prettier than you and certainly more clever and, I fear,morally more upright and kind. But, somehow, I always remembered you. Even during the monthssince the surrender when I was in France and England and hadnt seen you or heard of you andwas enjoying the society of many beautiful ladies, I always remembered you and wondered whatyou were doing.

For a moment she was indignant that he should say other women were prettier, more clever andkind than she, but that momentary flare was wiped out in her pleasure that he had remembered herand her charm. So he hadnt forgotten! That would make things easier. And he was behaving sonicely, almost like a gentleman would do under the circumstances. Now, all she had to do wasbring the subject around to himself, so she could intimate that she had not forgotten him either andthenShe gently squeezed his arm and dimpled again.

Oh, Rhett, how you do run on, teasing a country girl like me! I know mighty well you nevergave me a thought after you left me that night. You cant tell me you ever thought of me with allthose pretty French and English girls around you. But I didnt come all the way out here to hearyou talk foolishness about me. I cameI came because

Because?

Oh, Rhett, Im so terribly distressed about you! So frightened for you! When will they let youout of that terrible place? He swiftly covered her hand with his and held it hard against his arm.

Your distress does you credit. Theres no telling when Ill be out. Probably when theyvestretched the rope a bit more.

The rope?

Yes, I expect to make my exit from here at the ropes end.

They wont really hang you?

They will if they can get a little more evidence against me.

Oh, Rhett! she cried, her hand at her heart.

Would you be sorry? If you are sorry enough, Ill mention you in my will.

His dark eyes laughed at her recklessly and he squeezed her hand.

His will! She hastily cast down her eyes for fear of betrayal but not swiftly enough, for his eyesgleamed, suddenly curious.

According to the Yankees, I ought to have a fine will. There seems to be considerable interestin my finances at present. Every day, I am hauled up before another board of inquiry and askedfoolish questions. The rumor seems current that I made off with the mythical gold of the Confederacy.

Welldid you?

What a leading question! You know as well as I do that the Confederacy ran a printing pressinstead of a mint.

Where did you get all your money? Speculating? Aunt Pittypat said

What probing questions you ask!

Damn him! Of course, he had the money. She was so excited it became difficult to talk sweetlyto him.

Rhett, Im so upset about your being here. Dont you think theres a chance of your gettingout?

Nihil desperandum is my motto.

What does that mean?

It means maybe, my charming ignoramus.

She fluttered her thick lashes up to look at him and fluttered them down again.

Oh, youre too smart to let them hang you! I know youll think of some clever way to beatthem and get out! And when you do

And when I do? he asked softly, leaning closer.

Well, I and she managed a pretty confusion and a blush. The blush was not difficult for shewas breathless and her heart was beating like a drum. Rhett, Im so sorry about what II said toyou that nightyou knowat Rough and Ready. I wasoh, so very frightened and upset and youwere soso She looked down and saw his brown hand tighten over hers. AndI thoughtthen that Id never, never forgive you! But when Aunt Pitty told me yesterday that youthat theymight hang youit came over me of a sudden and II She looked up into his eyes with oneswift imploring glance and in it she put an agony of heartbreak. Oh, Rhett, Id die if they hangedyou! I couldnt bear it! You see, I And, because she could not longer sustain the hot leapinglight that was in his eyes, her lids fluttered down again.

In a moment Ill be crying, she thought in a frenzy of wonder and excitement. Shall I let myselfcry? Would that seem more natural?

He said quickly: My God, Scarlett, you cant mean that you and his hands closed over hersin so hard a grip that it hurt.

She shut her eyes tightly, trying to squeeze out tears, but remembered to turn her face up slightlyso he could kiss her with no difficulty. Now, in an instant his lips would be upon hers, the hardinsistent lips which she suddenly remembered with a vividness that left her weak. But he did notkiss her. Disappointment queerly stirring her, she opened her eyes a trifle and ventured a peep athim. His black head was bent over her hands and, as she watched, he lifted one and kissed it and,taking the other, laid it against his cheek for a moment. Expecting violence, this gentle andloverlike gesture startled her. She wondered what expression was on his face but could not tell forhis head was bowed.

She quickly lowered her gaze lest he should look up suddenly and see the expression on herface. She knew that the feeling of triumph surging through her was certain to be plain in her eyes.

In a moment he would ask her to marry himor at least say that he loved her and then ... As shewatched him through the veil of her lashes he turned her hand over, palm up, to kiss it too, andsuddenly he drew a quick breath. Looking down she saw her own palm, saw it as it really was forthe first time in a year, and a cold sinking fear gripped her. This was a strangers palm, not ScarlettOHaras soft, white, dimpled, helpless one. This hand was rough from work, brown with sunburn,splotched with freckles. The nails were broken and irregular, there were heavy calluses on thecushions of the palm, a half-healed blister on the thumb. The red scar which boiling fat had left lastmonth was ugly and glaring. She looked at it in horror and, before she thought, she swiftlyclenched her fist.

Still he did not raise his head. Still she could not see his face. He pried her fist open inexorablyand stared at it, picked up her other hand and held them both together silently, looking down atthem.

Look at me, he said finally raising his head, and his voice was very quiet. And drop thatdemure expression.

Unwillingly she met his eyes, defiance and perturbation on her face. His black brows were upand his eyes gleamed.

So you have been doing very nicely at Tara, have you? Cleared so much money on the cottonyou can go visiting. What have you been doing with your handsplowing?

She tried to wrench them away but he held them hard, running his thumbs over the calluses.

These are not the hands of a lady, he said and tossed them into her lap.

Oh, shut up! she cried, feeling a momentary intense relief at being able to speak her feelings.

Whose business is it what I do with my hands?

What a fool I am, she thought vehemently. I should have borrowed or stolen Aunt Pittys gloves.

But I didnt realize my hands looked so bad. Of course, he would notice them. And now Ive lostmy temper and probably ruined everything. Oh, to have this happen when he was right at the point of a declaration!

Your hands are certainly no business of mine, said Rhett coolly and lounged back in his chairindolently, his face a smooth blank.

So he was going to be difficult. Well, shed have to bear it meekly, much as she disliked it, if sheexpected to snatch victory from this debacle. Perhaps if she sweet-talked himI think youre real rude to throw off on my poor hands. Just because I went riding last weekwithout my gloves and ruined them

Riding, hell! he said in the same level voice. Youve been working with those hands,working like a nigger. Whats the answer? Why did you lie to me about everything being nice atTara?

Now, Rhett

Suppose we get down to the truth. What is the real purpose of your visit? Almost, I waspersuaded by your coquettish airs that you cared something about me and were sorry for me.

Oh, I am sorry! Indeed

No, you arent. They can hang me higher than Haman for all you care. Its written as plainly onyour face as hard work is written on your hands. You wanted something from me and you wantedit badly enough to put on quite a show. Why didnt you come out in the open and tell me what itwas? Youd have stood a much better chance of getting it, for if theres one virtue I value inwomen its frankness. But no, you had to come jingling your earbobs and pouting and frisking likea prostitute with a prospective client.

He did not raise his voice at the last words or emphasize them in any way but to Scarlett theycracked like a whiplash, and with despair she saw the end of her hopes of getting him to proposemarriage. Had he exploded with rage and injured vanity or upbraided her, as other men would havedone, she could have handled him. But the deadly quietness of his voice frightened her, left her utterlyat a loss as to her next move. Although he was a prisoner and the Yankees were in the nextroom, it came to her suddenly that Rhett Butler was a dangerous man to run afoul of.

I suppose my memory is getting faulty. I should have recalled that you are just like me and thatyou never do anything without an ulterior motive. Now, let me see. What could you have had upyour sleeve, Mrs. Hamilton? It isnt possible that you were so misguided as to think I wouldpropose matrimony?

Her face went crimson and she did not answer.

But you cant have forgotten my oft-repeated remark that I am not a marrying man?

When she did not speak, he said with sudden violence:

You hadnt forgotten? Answer me.

I hadnt forgotten, she said wretchedly.

What a gambler you are, Scarlett, he jeered. You took a chance that my incarceration awayfrom female companionship would put me in such a state Id snap at you like a trout at a worm.

And thats what you did, thought Scarlett with inward rage, and if it hadnt been for my handsNow, we have most of the truth, everything except your reason. See if you can tell me the truthabout why you wanted to lead me into wedlock.

There was a suave, almost teasing note in his voice and she took heart. Perhaps everythingwasnt lost, after all. Of course, she had ruined any hope of marriage but, even in her despair, shewas glad. There was something about this immobile man which frightened her, so that now thethought of marrying him was fearful. But perhaps if she was clever and played on his sympathiesand his memories, she could secure a loan. She pulled her face into a placating and childlikeexpression.

Oh, Rhett, you can help me so muchif youll just be sweet.

Theres nothing I like better than beingsweet.

Rhett, for old friendships sake, I want you to do me a favor.

So, at last the horny-handed lady comes to her real mission. I feared that visiting the sick andthe imprisoned was not your proper role. What do you want? Money?

The bluntness of his question ruined all hopes of leading up to the matter in any circuitous andsentimental way.

Dont be mean, Rhett, she coaxed. I do want some money. I want you to lend me threehundred dollars.

The truth at last. Talking love and thinking money. How truly feminine! Do you need themoney badly?

Oh, ye Well, not so terribly but I could use it

Three hundred dollars. Thats a vast amount of money. What do you want it for?

To pay taxes on Tara.

So you want to borrow some money. Well, since youre so businesslike, Ill be businesslike too.

What collateral will you give me?

What what?

Collateral. Security on my investment. Of course, I dont want to lose all that money. Hisvoice was deceptively smooth, almost silky, but she did not notice. Maybe everything would turnout nicely after all.

My earrings.

Im not interested in earrings.

Ill give you a mortgage on Tara.

Now just what would I do with a farm?

Well, you couldyou couldits a good plantation. And you wouldnt lose. Id pay you backout of next years cotton.

Im not so sure. He tilted back in his chair and stuck his hands in his pockets. Cotton pricesare dropping. Times are so hard and moneys so tight.

Oh, Rhett, you are teasing me! You know you have millions!

There was a warm dancing malice in his eyes as he surveyed her.

So everything is going nicely and you dont need the money very badly. Well, Im glad to hearthat. I like to know that all is well with old friends.

Oh, Rhett, for Gods sake ... she began desperately, her courage and control breaking,Do lower your voice. You dont want the Yankees to hear you, I hope. Did anyone ever tell youyou had eyes like a cata cat in the dark?

Rhett, dont! Ill tell you everything. I do need the money so badly. II lied about everythingbeing all right. Everythings as wrong as it could be. Father isishes not himself. Hes beenqueer ever since Mother died and he cant help me any. Hes just like a child. And we havent asingle field hand to work the cotton and theres so many to feed, thirteen of us. And the taxesthey are so high. Rhett, Ill tell you everything. For over a year weve been just this side ofstarvation. Oh, you dont know! You cant know! Weve never had enough to eat and its terrible towake up hungry and go to sleep hungry. And we havent any warm clothes and the children are alwayscold and sick and

Where did you get the pretty dress?

Its made out of Mothers curtains, she answered, too desperate to lie about this shame. Icould stand being hungry and cold but nownow the Carpetbaggers have raised our taxes. Andthe moneys got to be paid right away. And I havent any money except one five-dollar gold piece.

Ive got to have money for the taxes! Dont you see? If I dont pay them, Illwell lose Tara andwe just cant lose it! I cant let it go!

Why didnt you tell me all this at first instead of preying on my susceptible heartalwaysweak where pretty ladies are concerned? No, Scarlett, dont cry. Youve tried every trick exceptthat one and I dont think I could stand it. My feelings are already lacerated with disappointment atdiscovering it was my money and not my charming self you wanted.

She remembered that he frequently told bald truths about himself when he spoke mockinglymocking himself as well as others, and she hastily looked up at him. Were his feelings really hurt?

Did he really care about her? Had he been on the verge of a proposal when he saw her palms? Orhad he only been leading up to another such odious proposal as he had made twice before? If hereally cared about her, perhaps she could smooth him down. But his black eyes raked her in nolover-like way and he was laughing softly.

I dont like your collateral. Im no planter. What else have you to offer?

Well, she had come to it at last. Now for it! She drew a deep breath and met his eyes squarely,all coquetry and airs gone as her spirit rushed out to grapple that which she feared most.

II have myself.

Yes?

Her jaw line tightened to squareness and her eyes went emerald.

You remember that night on Aunt Pittys porch, during the siege? You saidyou said then thatyou wanted me.

He leaned back carelessly in his chair and looked into her tense face and his own dark face wasinscrutable. Something flickered behind his eyes but he said nothing.

You saidyou said youd never wanted a woman as much as you wanted me. If you still wantme, you can have me, Rhett, Ill do anything you say but, for Gods sake, write me a draft for themoney! My words good. I swear it. I wont go back on it. Ill put it in writing if you like.

He looked at her oddly, still inscrutable and as she hurried on she could not tell if he wereamused or repelled. If he would only say something, anything! She felt her cheeks getting hot.

I have got to have the money soon, Rhett. Theyll turn us out in the road and that damnedoverseer of Fathers will own the place and

Just a minute. What makes you think I still want you? What makes you think you are worththree hundred dollars? Most women dont come that high.

She blushed to her hair line and her humiliation was complete.

Why are you doing this? Why not let the farm go and live at Miss Pittypats. You own half thathouse.

Name of God! she cried. Are you a fool? I cant let Tara go. Its home. I wont let it go. Notwhile Ive got breath left in me!

The Irish, said he, lowering his chair back to level and removing his hands from his pockets,are the damnedest race. They put so much emphasis on so many wrong things. Land, for instance.

And every bit of earth is just like every other bit. Now, let me get this straight, Scarlett. You arecoming to me with a business proposition. Ill give you three hundred dollars and youll becomemy mistress.

Yes.

Now that the repulsive word had been said, she felt somehow easier and hope awoke in heragain. He had said Ill give you. There was a diabolic gleam in his eyes as if something amusedhim greatly.

And yet, when I had the effrontery to make you this same proposition, you turned me out of thehouse. And also you called me a number of very hard names and mentioned in passing that youdidnt want a passel of brats. No, my dear, Im not rubbing it in. Im only wondering at thepeculiarities of your mind. You wouldnt do it for your own pleasure but you will to keep the wolfaway from the door. It proves my point that all virtue is merely a matter of prices.

Oh, Rhett, how you run on! If you want to insult me, go on and do it but give me the money.

She was breathing easier now. Being what he was, Rhett would naturally want to torment andinsult her as much as possible to pay her back for past slights and for her recent attempted trickery.

Well, she could stand it. She could stand anything. Tara was worth it all. For a brief moment it wasmid-summer and the afternoon skies were blue and she lay drowsily in the thick clover of Taras lawn, looking up at the billowing cloud castles, the fragrance of white blossoms in her nose and thepleasant busy humming of bees in her ears. Afternoon and hush and the far-off sound of thewagons coming in from the spiraling red fields. Worth it all, worth more.

Her head went up.

Are you going to give me the money?

He looked as if he were enjoying himself and when he spoke there was suave brutality in hisvoice.

No, Im not, he said.

For a moment her mind could not adjust itself to his words.

I couldnt give it to you, even if I wanted to. I havent a cent on me. Not a dollar in Atlanta. Ihave some money, yes, but not here. And Im not saying where it is or how much. But if I tried todraw a draft on it, the Yankees would be on me like a duck on a June bug and then neither of uswould get it. What do you think of that?

Her face went an ugly green, freckles suddenly standing out across her nose and her contortedmouth was like Geralds in a killing rage. She sprang to her feet with an incoherent cry whichmade the hum of voices in the next room cease suddenly. Swift as a panther, Rhett was beside her,his heavy hand across her mouth, his arm tight about her waist. She struggled against him madly,trying to bite his hand, to kick his legs, to scream her rage, despair, hate, her agony of brokenpride. She bent and twisted every way against the iron of his arm, her heart near bursting, her tightstays cutting off her breath. He held her so tightly, so roughly that it hurt and the hand over hermouth pinched into her jaws cruelly. His face was white under its tan, his eyes hard and anxious ashe lifted her completely off her feet, swung her up against his chest and sat down in the chair,holding her writhing in his lap.

Darling, for Gods sake! Stop! Hush! Dont yell. Theyll be in here in a minute if you do. Docalm yourself. Do you want the Yankees to see you like this?

She was beyond caring who saw her, beyond anything except a fiery desire to kill him, butdizziness was sweeping her. She could not breathe; he was choking her; her stays were like aswiftly compressing band of iron; his arms about her made her shake with helpless hate and fury.

Then his voice became thin and dim and his face above her swirled in a sickening mist whichbecame heavier and heavier until she no longer saw himor anything else.

When she made feeble swimming motions to come back to consciousness, she was tired to herbones, weak, bewildered. She was lying back in the chair, her bonnet off, Rhett was slapping herwrist, his black eyes searching her face anxiously. The nice young captain was trying to pour aglass of brandy into her mouth and had spilled it down her neck. The other officers hoveredhelplessly about, whispering and waving their hands.

Iguess I must have fainted, she said, and her voice sounded so far away it frightened her.

Drink this, said Rhett, taking the glass and pushing it against her lips. Now she rememberedand glared feebly at him but she was too tired for anger.

Please, for my sake.

She gulped and choked and began coughing but he pushed it to her mouth again. She swalloweddeeply and the hot liquid burned suddenly in her throat.

I think shes better now, gentlemen, said Rhett, and I thank you very much. The realizationthat Im to be executed was too much for her.

The group in blue shuffled their feet and looked embarrassed and after several clearings ofthroats, they tramped out. The young captain paused in the doorway.

If theres anything more I can do

No, thank you.

He went out, closing the door behind him.

Drink some more, said RhettNo.

Drink it.

She swallowed another mouthful and the warmth began spreading through her body and strengthflowed slowly back into her shaking legs. She pushed away the glass and tried to rise but hepressed her back.

Take your hands off me. Im going.

Not yet. Wait a minute. You might faint again.

Id rather faint in the road than be here with you.

Just the same, I wont have you fainting in the road.

Let me go. I hate you.

A faint smile came back to his face at her words.

That sounds more like you. You must be feeling better.

She lay relaxed for a moment, trying to summon anger to her aid, trying to draw on her strength.

But she was too tired. She was too tired to hate or to care very much about anything. Defeat lay onher spirit like lead. She had gambled everything and lost everything. Not even pride was left. Thiswas the dead end of her last hope. This was the end of Tara, the end of them all. For a long timeshe lay back with her eyes closed, hearing his heavy breathing near her, and the glow of the brandycrept gradually over her, giving a false strength and warmth. When finally she opened her eyes andlooked him in the face, anger had roused again. As her slanting eyebrows rushed down together ina frown Rhetts old smile came back.

Now you are better. I can tell it by your scowl.

Of course, Im all right. Rhett Butler, you are hateful, a skunk, if ever I saw one! You knewvery well what I was going to say as soon as I started talking and you knew you werent going togive me the money. And yet you let me go right on. You could have spared me

Spared you and missed hearing all that? Not much. I have so few diversions here. I dont knowwhen Ive ever heard anything so gratifying. He laughed his sudden mocking laugh. At the sound she leaped to her feet, snatching up her bonnet.

He suddenly had her by the shoulders.

Not quite yet. Do you feel well enough to talk sense?

Let me go!

You are well enough, I see. Then, tell me this. Was I the only iron you had in the fire? Hiseyes were keen and alert, watching every change in her face.

What do you mean?

Was I the only man you were going to try this on?

Is that any of your business?

More than you realize. Are there any other men on your string? Tell me!

No.

Incredible. I cant imagine you without five or six in reserve. Surely someone will turn up toaccept your interesting proposition. I feel so sure of it that I want to give you a little advice.

I dont want your advice.

Nevertheless I will give it. Advice seems to be the only thing I can give you at present. Listento it, for its good advice. When you are trying to get something out of a man, dont blurt it out asyou did to me. Do try to be more subtle, more seductive. It gets better results. You used to knowhow, to perfection. But just now when you offered me yourercollateral for my money youlooked as hard as nails. Ive seen eyes like yours above a dueling pistol twenty paces from me andthey arent a pleasant sight. They evoke no ardor in the male breast. Thats no way to handle men,my dear. You are forgetting your early training.

I dont need you to tell me how to behave, she said and wearily put on her bonnet. Shewondered how he could jest so blithely with a rope about his neck and her pitiful circumstancesbefore him. She did not even notice that his hands were jammed in his pockets in hard fists as if hewere straining at his own impotence.

Cheer up, he said, as she tied the bonnet strings. You can come to my hanging and it willmake you feel lots better. Itll even up all your old scores with meeven this one. And Illmention you in my will.

Thank you, but they may not hang you till its too late to pay the taxes, she said with a suddenmalice that matched his own, and she meant it.

Chapter 35

IT WAS RAINING when she came out of the building and the sky was a dull putty color. Thesoldiers on the square had taken shelter in their huts and the streets were deserted. There was novehicle in sight and she knew she would have to walk the long way home.

The brandy glow faded as she trudged along. The cold wind made her shiver and the chilly needle-like drops drove hard into her face. The rain quickly penetrated Aunt Pittys thin cloak untilit hung in clammy folds about her. She knew the velvet dress was being ruined and as for the tailfeathers on the bonnet, they were as drooping and draggled as when their former owner had wornthem about the wet barn yard of Tara. The bricks of the sidewalk were broken and, for longstretches, completely gone. In these spots the mud was ankle deep and her slippers stuck in it as ifit were glue, even coming completely off her feet. Every time she bent over to retrieve them, thehem of the dress fell in the mud. She did not even try to avoid puddles but stepped dully into them,dragging her heavy skirts after her. She could feel her wet petticoat and pantalets cold about herankles, but she was beyond caring about the wreck of the costume on which she had gambled somuch. She was chilled and disheartened and desperate.

How could she ever go back to Tara and face them after her brave words? How could she tellthem they must all gosomewhere? How could she leave it all, the red fields, the tall pines, thedark swampy bottom lands, the quiet burying ground where Ellen lay in the cedars deep shade?

Hatred of Rhett burned in her heart as she plodded along the slippery way. What a blackguard hewas! She hoped they did hang him, so she would never have to face him again with his knowledgeof her disgrace and her humiliation. Of course, he could have gotten the money for her if hedwanted to get it. Oh, hanging was too good for him. Thank God, he couldnt see her now, with herclothes soaking wet and her hair straggling and her teeth chattering. How hideous she must lookand how he would laugh!

The negroes she passed turned insolent grins at her and laughed among themselves as shehurried by, slipping and sliding in the mud, stopping, panting to replace her slippers. How daredthey laugh, the black apes! How dared they grin at her, Scarlett OHara of Tara! Shed like to havethem all whipped until the blood ran down their backs. What devils the Yankees were to set themfree, free to jeer at white people!

As she walked down Washington Street the landscape was as dreary as her own heart. Herethere was none of the bustle and cheerfulness which she had noted on Peachtree Street. Here manyhandsome homes had once stood, but few of them had been rebuilt. Smoked foundations and thelonesome blackened chimneys, now known as Shermans Sentinels, appeared with dishearteningfrequency. Overgrown paths led to what had been housesold lawns thick with dead weeds,carriage blocks bearing names she knew so well, hitching posts which would never again know theknot of reins. Cold wind and rain, mud and bare trees, silence and desolation. How wet her feetwere and how long the journey home!

She heard the splash of hooves behind her and moved farther over on the narrow sidewalk toavoid more mud splotches on Aunt Pittypats cloak. A horse and buggy came slowly up the roadand she turned to watch it, determined to beg a ride if the driver was a white person. The rainobscured her vision as the buggy came abreast, but she saw the driver peer over the tarpaulin thatstretched from the dashboard to his chin. There was something familiar about his face and as shestepped out into the road to get a closer view, there was an embarrassed little cough from the manand a well-known voice cried in accents of pleasure and astonishment: Surely, it cant be MissScarlett!

Oh, Mr. Kennedy! she cried, splashing across the road and leaning on the muddy wheel, heedless of further damage to the cloak. I was never so glad to see anybody in my life!

He colored with pleasure at the obvious sincerity of her words, hastily squirted a stream oftobacco juice from the opposite side of the buggy and leaped spryly to the ground. He shook herhand enthusiastically and holding up the tarpaulin, assisted her into the buggy.

Miss Scarlett, what are you doing over in this section by yourself? Dont you know ifsdangerous these days? And you are soaking wet. Here, wrap the robe around your feet.

As he fussed over her, clucking like a hen, she gave herself up to the luxury of being taken careof. It was nice to have a man fussing and clucking and scolding, even if it was only that old maidin pants, Frank Kennedy. It was especially soothing after Rhetts brutal treatment. And oh, howgood to see a County face when she was so far from home! He was well dressed, she noticed, andthe buggy was new too. The horse looked young and well fed, but Frank looked far older than hisyears, older than on that Christmas eve when he had been at Tara with his men. He was thin andsallow faced and his yellow eyes were watery and sunken in creases of loose flesh. His ginger-colored beard was scantier than ever, streaked with tobacco juice and as ragged as if he clawed at itincessantly. But he looked bright and cheerful, in contrast with the lines of sorrow and worry andweariness which Scarlett saw in faces everywhere.

Its a pleasure to see you, said Frank warmly. I didnt know you were in town. I saw MissPittypat only last week and she didnt tell me you were coming. Diderahemdid anyone elsecome op from Tara with you?

He was thinking of Suellen, the silly old fool!

No, she said, wrapping the warm lap robe about her and trying to pull it up around her neck.

I came alone. I didnt give Aunt Pitty any warning.

He chirruped to the horse and it plodded off, picking its way carefully down the slick road.

All the folks at Tara well?

Oh, yes, so-so.

She must think of something to talk about, yet it was so hard to talk. Her mind was leaden withdefeat and all she wanted was to lie back in this warm blanket and say to herself: I wont think ofTara now. Ill think of it later, when it wont hurt so much. If she could just get him started talkingon some subject which would hold him all the way home, so she would have nothing to do butmurmur How nice and You certainly are smart at intervals.

Mr. Kennedy, Im so surprised to see you. I know Ive been a bad girl, not keeping up with oldfriends, but I didnt know you were here in Atlanta. I thought somebody told me you were inMarietta.

I do business in Marietta, a lot of business, he said. Didnt Miss Suellen tell you I had settledin Atlanta? Didnt she tell you about my store?

Vaguely she had a memory of Suellen chattering about Frank and a store but she never paidmuch heed to anything Suellen said. It had been sufficient to know that Frank was alive and wouldsome day take Suellen off her hands.

No, not a word, she lied. Have you a store? How smart you must be!

He looked a little hurt at hearing that Suellen had not published the news but brightened at theflattery.

Yes, Ive got a store, and a pretty good one I think. Folks tell me Im a born merchant. Helaughed pleasedly, the tittery cackling laugh which she always found so annoying.

Conceited old fool, she thought.

Oh, you could be a success at anything you turned your hand to, Mr. Kennedy. But how onearth did you ever get started with the store? When I saw you Christmas before last you said youdidnt have a cent in the world.

He cleared his throat raspingly, clawed at his whiskers and smiled his nervous timid smile.

Well, its a long story, Miss Scarlett.

Thank the Lord! she thought. Perhaps it will hold him till we get home. And aloud: Do tell!

You recall when we came to Tara last, hunting for supplies? Well, not long after that I went intoactive service. I mean real fighting. No more commissary for me. There wasnt much need for acommissary, Miss Scarlett, because we couldnt hardly pick up a thing for the army, and I thoughtthe place for an able-bodied man was in the fighting line. Well, I fought along with the cavalry fora spell till I got a minie ball through the shoulder.

He looked very proud and Scarlett said: How dreadful!

Oh, it wasnt so bad, just a flesh wound, he said deprecatingly. I was sent down south to ahospital and when I was just about well, the Yankee raiders came through. My, my, but that was ahot time! We didnt have much warning and all of us who could walk helped haul out the armystores and the hospital equipment to the train tracks to move it. Wed gotten one train about loadedwhen the Yankees rode in one end of town and out we went the other end as fast as we could go.

My, my, that was a mighty sad sight, sitting on top of that train and seeing the Yankees burn thosesupplies we had to leave at the depot. Miss Scarlett, they burned about a half-mile of stuff we hadpiled up there along the tracks. We just did get away ourselves.

How dreadful!

Yes, thats the word. Dreadful. Our men had come back into Atlanta then and so our train wassent here. Well, Miss Scarlett, it wasnt long before the war was over andwell, there was a lot ofchina and cots and mattresses and blankets and nobody claiming them. I suppose rightfully theybelonged to the Yankees. I think those were the terms of the surrender, werent they?

Um, said Scarlett absently. She was getting warmer now and a little drowsy.

I dont know till now if I did right, he said, a little querulously. But the way I figured it, allthat stuff wouldnt do the Yankees a bit of good. Theyd probably burn it. And our folks had paidgood solid money for it, and I thought it still ought to belong to the Confederacy or to theConfederates. Do you see what I mean?

Um.

Im glad you agree with me, Miss Scarlett. In a way, its been on my conscience. Lots of folkshave told me: Oh, forget about it, Frank, but I cant I couldnt hold up my head if I thought Iddone what wasnt right. Do you think I did right?

Of course, she said, wondering what the old fool had been talking about. Some struggle withhis conscience. When a man got as old as Frank Kennedy he ought to have learned not to botherabout things that didnt matter. But he always was so nervous and fussy and old maidish.

Im glad to hear you say it. After the surrender I had about ten dollars in silver and nothing elsein the world. You know what they did to Jonesboro and my house and store there. I just didntknow what to do. But I used the ten dollars to put a roof on an old store down by Five Points and Imoved the hospital equipment in and started selling it. Everybody needed beds and china and mattressesand I sold them cheap, because I figured it was about as much other folks stuff as it wasmine. But I cleared money on it and bought some more stuff and the store just went along fine. Ithink Ill make a lot of money on it if things pick up.

At the word money, her mind came back to him, crystal clear.

You say youve made money?

He visibly expanded under her interest. Few women except Suellen had ever given him morethan perfunctory courtesy and it was very flattering to have a former belle like Scarlett hanging onhis words. He slowed the horse so they would not reach home before he had finished his story.

Im not a millionaire, Miss Scarlett, and considering the money I used to have, what Ive gotnow sounds small. But I made a thousand dollars this year. Of course, five hundred of it went topaying for new stock and repairing the store and paying the rent. But Ive made five hundred clearand as things are certainly picking up, I ought to clear two thousand next year. I can sure use it,too, for you see, Ive got another iron in the fire.

Interest had sprung up sharply in her at the talk of money. She veiled her eyes with thick bristlylashes and moved a little closer to him.

What does that mean, Mr. Kennedy?

He laughed and slapped the reins against the horses back.

I guess Im boring you, talking about business, Miss Scarlett. A pretty little woman like youdoesnt need to know anything about business.

The old fool.

Oh, I know Im a goose about business but Im so interested! Please tell me all about it and youcan explain what I dont understand.

Well, my other iron is a sawmill.

A what?

A mill to cut up lumber and plane it. I havent bought it yet but Im going to. Theres a mannamed Johnson who has one, way out Peachtree road, and hes anxious to sell it. He needs somecash right away, so he wants to sell and stay and run it for me at a weekly wage. Its one of the fewmills in this section, Miss Scarlett. The Yankees destroyed most of them. And anyone who owns a sawmill owns a gold mine, for nowadays you can ask your own price for lumber. The Yankeesburned so many houses here and there arent enough for people to live in and it looks like folkshave gone crazy about rebuilding. They cant get enough lumber and they cant get it fast enough.

People are just pouring into Atlanta now, all the folks from the country districts who cant make ago of farming without darkies and the Yankees and Carpetbaggers who are swarming in trying topick our bones a little barer than they already are. I tell you Atlantas going to be a big town soon.

Theyve got to have lumber for their houses, so Im going to buy this mill just as soon aswell, assoon as some of the bills owing me are paid. By this time next year, I ought to be breathing easierabout money. II guess you know why Im so anxious to make money quickly, dont you?

He blushed and cackled again. Hes thinking of Suellen, Scarlett thought in disgust.

For a moment she considered asking him to lend her three hundred dollars, but wearily sherejected the idea. He would be embarrassed; he would stammer, he would offer excuses, but hewouldnt lend it to her. He had worked hard for it, so he could marry Suellen in the spring and if heparted with it, his wedding would be postponed indefinitely. Even if she worked on his sympathiesand his duty toward his future family and gained his promise of a loan, she knew Suellen wouldnever permit it. Suellen was getting more and more worried over the fact that she was practicallyan old maid and she would move heaven and earth to prevent anything from delaying her marriage.

What was there in that whining complaining girl to make this old fool so anxious to give her asoft nest? Suellen didnt deserve a loving husband and the profits of store and a sawmill. Theminute Sue got her hands little money shed give herself unendurable airs and never contributeonecenttowardtheu(on) pk(a) eep of Tara. Not Suellen! Shed think herself well out of it andnot care if Tara went for taxes or burned to the ground, so long as she had pretty clothes and aMrs. in front of her name.

As Scarlett thought of Suellens secure future and the precarious one of herself and Tara, angerflamed in her at the unfairness of life. Hastily she looked out of the buggy into the muddy street,lest Frank should see her expression. She was going to lose everything she had, while SueSuddenly a determination was born in her.

Suellen should not have Frank and his store and his mill!

Suellen didnt deserve them. She was going to have them herself. She thought of Tara andremembered Jonas Wilkerson, venomous as a rattler, at the foot of the front steps, and she graspedat the last straw floating above the shipwreck of her life. Rhett had failed her but the Lord hadprovided Frank.

But can I get him? Her fingers clenched as she looked unseeingly into the rain. Can I make himforget Sue and propose to me real quick? If I could make Rhett almost propose, I know I could getFrank! Her eyes went over him, her lids flickering. Certainly, hes no beauty, she thought coolly,and hes got very bad teeth and his breath smells bad and hes old enough to be my father. Moreover,hes nervous and timid and well meaning, and I dont know of any more damning qualities aman can have. But at least, hes a gentleman and I believe I could stand living with him better thanwith Rhett. Certainly I could manage him easier. At any rate, beggars cant be choosers.

That he was Suellens fianc caused her no qualm of conscience. After the complete moral collapse which had sent her to Atlanta and to Rhett, the appropriation of her sisters betrothedseemed a minor affair and one not to be bothered with at this time.

With the rousing of fresh hope, her spine stiffened and she forgot that her feet were wet andcold. She looked at Frank so steadily, her eyes narrowing, that he became somewhat alarmed andshe dropped her gaze swiftly, remembering Rhetts words: Ive seen eyes like yours above adueling pistol. ... They evoke no ardor in the male breast.

Whats the matter, Miss Scarlett? You got a chill?

Yes, she answered helplessly. Would you mind She hesitated timidly. Would you mind ifI put my hand in your coat pocket? Its so cold and my muff is soaked through.

Whywhyof course not! And you havent any gloves! My, my, what a brute Ive beenidling along like this, talking my head off when you must be freezing and wanting to get to a fire.

Giddap, Sally! By the way, Miss Scarlett, Ive been so busy talking about myself I havent evenasked you what you were doing in this section in this weather?

I was at the Yankee headquarters, she answered before she thought. His sandy brows went upin astonishment.

But Miss Scarlett! The soldiers Why

Mary, Mother of God, let me think of a real good lie, she prayed hastily. It would never do forFrank to suspect she had seen Rhett. Frank thought Rhett the blackest of blackguards and unsafefor decent women to speak to.

I went thereI went there to see ifif any of the officers would buy fancy work from me tosend home to their wives. I embroider very nicely.

He sank back against the seat aghast, indignation struggling with bewilderment.

You went to the Yankees But Miss Scarlett! You shouldnt. Whywhy ... Surely your fatherdoesnt know! Surely, Miss Pittypat

Oh, I shall die if you tell Aunt Pittypat! she cried in real anxiety and burst into tears. It waseasy to cry, because she was so cold and miserable, but the effect was startling. Frank could nothave been more embarrassed or helpless if she had suddenly begun disrobing. He clicked histongue against his teeth several times, muttering My! My! and made futile gestures at her. Adaring thought went through his mind that he should draw her head onto his shoulder and pat herbut he had never done this to any woman and hardly knew how to go about it. Scarlett OHara, sohigh spirited and pretty, crying here in his buggy. Scarlett OHara, the proudest of the proud, tryingto sell needlework to the Yankees. His heart burned.

She sobbed on, saying a few words now and then, and he gathered that all was not well at Tara.

Mr. OHara was still not himself at all, and there wasnt enough food to go around for so many.

So she had to come to Atlanta to try to make a little money for herself and her boy. Frank clickedhis tongue again and suddenly he found that her head was on his shoulder. He did not quite knowhow it got there. Surely he had not placed it there, but there her head was and there was Scarletthelplessly sobbing against his thin chest, an exciting and novel sensation for him. He patted hershoulder timidly, gingerly at first, and when she did not rebuff him he became bolder and patted her firmly. What a helpless, sweet, womanly little thing she was. And how brave and silly to try herhand at making money by her needle. But dealing with the Yankeesthat was too much.

I wont tell Miss Pittypat, but you must promise me, Miss Scarlett, that you wont do anythinglike this again. The idea of your fathers daughter

Her wet green eyes sought his helplessly.

But, Mr. Kennedy, I must do something. I must take care of my poor little boy and there is noone to look after us now.

You are a brave little woman, he pronounced, but I wont have you do this sort of thing. Yourfamily would die of shame.

Then what will I do? The swimming eyes looked up to him as if she knew he knew everythingand was hanging on his words.

Well, I dont know right now. But Ill think of something.

Oh, I know you will! You are so smartFrank.

She had never called him by his first name before and the sound came to him as a pleasant shockand surprise. The poor girl was probably so upset she didnt even notice her slip. He felt verykindly toward her and very protecting. If there was anything he could do for Suellen OHarassister, he would certainly do it. He pulled out a red bandanna handkerchief and handed it to her andshe wiped her eyes and began to smile tremulously.

Im such a silly little goose, she said apologetically. Please forgive me.

You arent a silly little goose. Youre a very brave little woman and you are trying to carry tooheavy a load. Im afraid Miss Pittypat isnt going to be much help to you. I hear she lost most ofher property and Mr. Henry Hamiltons in bad shape himself. I only wish I had a home to offer youshelter in. But, Miss Scarlett, you just remember this, when Miss Suellen and I are married, therellalways be a place for you under our roof and for Wade Hampton too.

Now was the time! Surely the saints and angels watched over her to give her such a Heaven-sentopportunity. She managed to look very startled and embarrassed and opened her mouth as if tospeak quickly and then shut it with a pop.

Dont ten me you didnt know I was to be your brother-in-law this spring, he said withnervous jocularity. And then, seeing her eyes fill up with tears, he questioned in alarm: Whats thematter? Miss Sues not ill, is she?

Oh, no! No!

There is something wrong. You must tell me.

Oh, I cant! I didnt know! I thought surely she must have written you Oh, how mean!

Miss Scarlett, what is it?

Oh, Frank, I didnt mean to let it out but I thought, of course, you knewthat she had writtenyou

Written me what? He was trembling.

Oh, to do this to a fine man like you!

Whats she done?

She didnt write you? Oh, I guess she was too ashamed to write you. She should be ashamed!

Oh, to have such a mean sister!

By this time, Frank could not even get questions to his lips. He sat staring at her, gray faced, thereins slack in his hands.

Shes going to marry Tony Fontaine next month. Oh, Im so sorry, Frank. So sorry to be the oneto tell you. She just got tired of waiting and she was afraid shed be an old maid.

Mammy was standing on the front porch when Frank helped Scarlett out of the buggy. She hadevidently been standing there for some time, for her head rag was damp and the old shawl clutchedtightly about her showed rain spots. Her wrinkled black face a study in anger and apprehensionandherlipwaspushedoutfartherthanScarlettcouldeve(was) r remember. She peeredquickly at Frank and, when she saw who it was, her face changed pleasure, bewilderment andsomething akin to guilt spreading over it. She waddled forward to Frank with pleased greetingsand grinned and curtsied when he shook her hand.

It sho is good ter see home folks, she said. How is you, Mist Frank? My, ain you lookin

fine an gran! Effen Ahd knowed Miss Scarlett wuz out wid you, Ah wouldn worrit so. Ahdknowed she wuz tekken keer of. Ah come back hyah anfine she gone anAh been as stracted as achicken wid its haid off, thinkin she runnin roun dis town by herseff wid all dese trashy freeissue niggers on de street. Huccome you din tell me you gwine out, honey? An you wid a cole!

Scarlett winked slyly at Frank and, for all his distress at the bad news he had just heard, hesmiled, knowing she was enjoining silence and making him one in a pleasant conspiracy.

You run up and fix me some dry clothes, Mammy, she said. And some hot tea.

Lawd, yo new dress is plum ruint, grumbled Mammy. Ah gwine have a time dryin it an

brushin it, so itll be fit ter be wo ter de weddin ternight.

She went into the house and Scarlett leaned close to Frank and whispered: Do come to suppertonight. We are so lonesome. And were going to the wedding afterward. Do be our escort! And,please dont say anything to Aunt Pitty aboutabout Suellen. It would distress her so much and Icant bear for her to know that my sister

Oh, I wont! I wont! Frank said hastily, wincing from the very thought.

Youve been so sweet to me today and done me so much good. I feel right brave again. Shesqueezed his hand in parting and turned the full battery of her eyes upon him.

Mammy, who was waiting just inside the door, gave her an inscrutable look and followed her,puffing, up the stairs to the bedroom. She was silent while she stripped off the wet clothes andhung them over chairs and tucked Scarlett into bed. When she had brought up a cup of hot tea anda hot brick, rolled in flannel, she looked down at Scarlett and said, with the nearest approach to anapology in her voice Scarlett had ever heard: Lamb, huccome you din tell yo own Mammy whut you wuz upter? Den Ah wouldn had ter traipse all dis way up hyah ter Lanta. Ah is too ole an toofat fer sech runnin roun.

What do you mean?

Honey, you kain fool me. Ah knows you. An Ah seed Mist Franks face jes now an Ah seedyo face, an Ah kin read yo mine lak a pahson read a Bible. An Ah heerd dat whisperin you wuzgivin him bout Miss Suellen. Effen Ahd had a notion twuz Mist Frank you wuz affer, Ahdstayed home whar Ah blongs.

Well, said Scarlett shortly, snuggling under the blankets and realizing it was useless to try tothrow Mammy off the scent, who did you think it was?

Chile, Ah din know but Ah din lak de look on yo face yestiddy. An Ah membered MissPittypat writin Miss Melly dat dat rapscallion Butler man had lots of money an Ah doan fergitwhat Ah hears. But Mist Frank, he a gempmum even ef he ain so pretty.

Scarlett gave her a sharp look and Mammy returned the gaze with calm omniscience.

Well, what are you going to do about it? Tattle to Suellen?

Ah is gwine ter hep you pleasure Mist Frank evey way Ah knows how, said Mammy,tucking the covers about Scarletts neck.

Scarlett lay quietly for a while, as Mammy fussed about the room, relief flooding her that therewas no need for words between them. No explanations were asked, no reproaches made. Mammyunderstood and was silent. In Mammy, Scarlett had found a realist more uncompromising thanherself. The mottled wise old eyes saw deeply, saw clearly, with the directness of the savage andthe child, undeterred by conscience when danger threatened her pet. Scarlett was her baby andwhat her baby wanted, even though it belonged to another, Mammy was willing to help her obtain.

The rights of Suellen and Frank Kennedy did not even enter her mind, save to cause a grim inwardchuckle. Scarlett was in trouble and doing the best she could, and Scarlett was Miss Ellens child.

Mammy rallied to her with never a moments hesitation.

Scarlett felt the silent reinforcement and, as the hot brick at her feet warmed her, the hope whichhad flickered faintly on the cold ride home grew into a flame. It swept through her, making herheart pump the blood through her veins in pounding surges. Strength was coming back and areckless excitement which made her want to laugh aloud. Not beaten yet, she thought exultantly.

Hand me the mirror, Mammy, she said.

Keep yo shoulders unner dat kivver, ordered Mammy, passing the hand mirror to her, a smileon her thick lips.

Scarlett looked at herself.

I look white as a hant, she said, and my hair is as wild as a horses tail.

You doan look peart as you mout.

Hum. ... Is it raining very hard?

You know its poin.

Well, just the same, youve got to go downtown for me.

Not in dis rain, Ah ain.

Yes, you are or Ill go myself.

What you got ter do dat woan wait? Look ter me lak you done nuff fer one day.

I want, said Scarlett, surveying herself carefully in the mirror, a bottle of cologne water. Youcan wash my hair and rinse it with cologne. And buy me a jar of quince-seed jelly to make it liedown flat.

Ah ain gwine wash yo har in dis wedder an you ain gwine put no cologne on yo haid lak afas woman needer. Not wile Ah got breaf in mah body.

Oh, yes, I am. Look in my purse and get that five-dollar gold piece out and go to town. Ander, Mammy, while you are downtown, you might get me aa pot of rouge.

Whut dat? asked Mammy suspiciously.

Scarlett met her eyes with a coldness she was far from feeling. There was never any way ofknowing just how far Mammy could be bullied.

Never you mind. Just ask for it.

Ah ain buyin nuthin dat Ah doan know whut tis.

Well, its paint, if youre so curious! Face paint. Dont stand there and swell up like a toad. Goon.

Paint! ejaculated Mammy. Face paint! Well, you ain so big dat Ah kain whup you! Ah ain

never been so scanlized! You is los yo mine! Miss Ellen be tuhnin in her grabe dis minute!

Paintin yo face lak a

You know very well Grandma Robillard painted her face and

Yasm, an wo only one petticoat an it wrang out wid water ter mek it stick an show de shapeof her laigs, but dat ain sayin you is gwine do sumpin lak dat! Times wuz scanlous wen OleMiss wuz young but times changes, dey do an

Name of God! cried Scarlett, losing her temper and throwing back the covers. You can gostraight back to Tara!

You kain sen me ter Tara ness Ah wants ter go. Ah is free, said Mammy heatedly. An Ah isgwine ter stay right hyah. Git back in dat baid. Does you want ter ketch pneumony jes now? Putdown dem stays! Put dem down, honey. Now, Miss Scarlett, you ain gwine nowhars in dis wedder.

Lawd God! But you sho look lak yo pa! Git back in baidAh kain go buyin no paint! Ah die ofshame, eveybody knowin it wud fer mah chile! Miss Scarlett, you is so sweet an pretty lookin

you doan need no paint. Honey, doan nobody but bad womens use dat stuff.

Well, they get results, dont they?

Jesus, hear her! Lamb, doan say bad things lak dat! Put down dem wet stockins, honey. Ahkain have you buy dat stuff yoseff. Miss Ellen would hant me. Git back in baid. Ahll go. MaybeAh fine me a sto what dey doan know us.

That night at Mrs. Elsings, when Fanny had been duly married and old Levi and the othermusicians were tuning up for the dance, Scarlett looked about her with gladness. It was so excitingto be actually at a party again. She was pleased also with the warm reception she had received.

When she entered the house on Franks arm, everyone had rushed to her with cries of pleasure andwelcome, kissed her, shaken her hand, told her they had missed her dreadfully and that she mustnever go back to Tara. The men seemed gallantly to have forgotten she had tried her best to breaktheir hearts in other days and the girls that she had done everything in her power to entice theirbeaux away from them. Even Mrs. Merriwether, Mrs. Whiting, Mrs. Meade and the otherdowagers who had been so cool to her during the last days of the war, forgot her flighty conductand their disapproval of it and recalled only that she had suffered in their common defeat and thatshe was Pittys niece and Charles widow. They kissed her and spoke gently with tears in their eyesof her dear mothers passing and asked at length about her father and her sisters. Everyone askedabout Melanie and Ashley, demanding the reason why they, too, had not come back to Atlanta.

In spite of her pleasure at the welcome, Scarlett felt a slight uneasiness which she tried toconceal, an uneasiness about the appearance of her velvet dress. It was still damp to the knees andstill spotted about the hem, despite the frantic efforts of Mammy and Cookie with a steaming kettle,a clean hair brush and frantic wavings in front of an open fire. Scarlett was afraid someonewould notice her bedraggled state and realize that this was her only nice dress. She was a littlecheered by the fact that many of the dresses of the other guests looked far worse than hers. Theywere so old and had such carefully mended and pressed looks. At least, her dress was whole andnew, damp though it wasin fact, the only new dress at the gathering with the exception ofFannys white-satin wedding gown.

Remembering what Aunt Pitty had told her about the Elsing finances, she wondered where themoney for the satin dress had been obtained and for the refreshments, and decorations andmusicians too. It must have cost a pretty penny. Borrowed money probably or else the wholeElsing clan had contributed to give Fanny this expensive wedding. Such a wedding in these hardtimes seemed to Scarlett an extravagance on a par with the tombstones of the Tarleton boys andshe felt the same irritation and lack of sympathy she had felt as she stood in the Tarleton buryingground. The days when money could be thrown away carelessly had passed. Why did these peoplepersist in making the gestures of the old days when the old days were gone?

But she shrugged off her momentary annoyance. It wasnt her money and she didnt want herevenings pleasure spoiled by irritation at other peoples foolishness.

She discovered she knew the groom quite well, for he was Tommy Wellburn from Sparta andshe had nursed him in 1863 when he had a wound in his shoulder. He had been a handsome youngsix-footer then and had given up his medical studies to go in the cavalry. Now he looked like alittle old man, so bent was he by the wound in his hip. He walked with some difficulty and, as AuntPitty had remarked, spraddled in a very vulgar way. But he seemed totally unaware of hisappearance, or unconcerned about it, and had the manner of one who asks no odds from any man.

He had given up all hope of continuing his medical studies and was now a contractor, working alabor crew of Irishmen who were building the new hotel. Scarlett wondered how he managed soonerous a job in his condition but asked no questions, realizing wryly that almost anything was possible when necessity drove.

Tommy and Hugh Elsing and the little monkey-like Ren Picard stood talking with her while thechairs and furniture were pushed back to the wall in preparation for the dancing. Hugh had notchanged since Scarlett last saw him in 1862. He was still the thin sensitive boy with the same lockof pale brown hair hanging over his forehead and the same delicate useless-looking hands sheremembered so well. But Ren had changed since that furlough when he married MaybelleMerriwether. He still had the Gallic twinkle in his black eyes and the Creole zest for living but, forall his easy laughter, there was something hard about his face which had not been there in the earlydays of the war. And the air of supercilious elegance which had clung about him in his strikingZouave uniform was completely gone.

Cheeks lak ze rose, eyes lak ze emerald! he said, kissing Scarletts hand and paying tribute tothe rouge upon her face. Pretty lak wen I first see you at ze bazaar. You remembaire? Nevairehave I forgot how you toss your wedding ring in my basket. Ha, but zat was brave! But I shouldnevaire have zink you wait so long to get anothaire ring!

His eyes sparkled wickedly and he dug his elbow into Hughs ribs.

And I never thought youd be driving a pie wagon, Renny Picard, she said. Instead of beingashamed at having his degrading occupation thrown in his face, he seemed pleased and laugheduproariously, slapping Hugh on the back.

Touch! he cried. Belle Mre, Madame Merriwether, she mek me do eet, ze first work I do enall my life, Ren Picard, who was to grow old breeding ze race horse, playing ze feedle! Now, Idrive ze pie wagon and I lak eet! Madame Belle Mre, she can mek a man do annyzing. She shouldhave been ze general and we win ze war, eh, Tommy?

Well! thought Scarlett. The idea of liking to drive a pie wagon when his people used to own tenmiles along the Mississippi River and a big house in New Orleans, too!

If wed had our mothers-in-law in the ranks, wed have beat the Yankees in a week, agreedTommy, his eyes straying to the slender, indomitable form of his new mother-in-law. The onlyreason we lasted as long as we did was because of the ladies behind us who wouldnt give up.

Wholl never give up, amended Hugh, and his smile was proud but a little wry. Theres not alady here tonight who has surrendered, no matter what her men folks did at Appomattox. Its a lotworse on them than it ever was on us. At least, we took it out in fighting.

And they in hating, finished Tommy. Eh, Scarlett? It bothers the ladies to see what their menfolks have come down to lots more than it bothers us. Hugh was to be a judge, Ren was to playthe fiddle before the crowned heads of Europe He ducked as Ren aimed a blow at him. And Iwas to be a doctor and now

Geeve us ze time! cried Ren. Zen I become ze Pie Prince of ze South! And my good Hughze King of ze Kindling and you, my Tommy, you weel own ze Irish slaves instead of ze darkyslaves. What changeswhat fun! And what eet do for you. Mees Scarlett, and Mees Melly? Youmeelk ze cow, peek ze cotton?

Indeed, no! said Scarlett coolly, unable to understand Rens gay acceptance of hardships.

Our darkies do that.

Mees Melly, I hear she call her boy Beauregard. You tell her I, Ren, approve and say thatexcept for Jesus there is no bettaire name.

And though he smiled, his eyes glowed proudly at the name of Louisianas dashing hero.

Well, theres Robert Edward Lee,  observed Tommy. And while Im not trying to lessen OldBeaus reputation, my first son is going to be named Bob Lee Wellburn.

Ren laughed and shrugged.

I recount to you a joke but eet eez a true story. And you see how Creoles zink of our braveBeauregard and of your General Lee. On ze train near New Orleans a man of Virginia, a man ofGeneral Lee, he meet wiz a Creole of ze troops of Beauregard. And ze man of Virginia, he talk,talk, talk how General Lee do zis, General Lee say zat. And ze Creole, he look polite and hewreenkle hees forehead lak he try to remembaire, and zen he smile and say: General Lee! Ah oui!

Now I know! General Lee! Ze man General Beauregard speak well of!

Scarlett tried to join politely in the laughter but she did not see any point to the story except thatCreoles were just as stuck up as Charleston and Savannah people. Moreover, she had alwaysthought Ashleys son should have been named after him.

The musicians after preliminary tunings and whangings broke into Old Dan Tucker andTommy turned to her.

Will you dance, Scarlett? I cant favor you but Hugh or Ren

No, thank you. Im still mourning my mother, said Scarlett hastily. I will sit them out.

Her eyes singled out Frank Kennedy and beckoned him from the side of Mrs. Elsing.

Ill sit in that alcove yonder if youll bring me some refreshments and then we can have a nicechat, she told Frank as the other three men moved off.

When he had hurried away to bring her a glass of wine and a paper thin slice of cake, Scarlett satdown in the air cove at the end of the drawing room and carefully arranged her skirts so that theworst spots would not show. The humiliating events of the morning with Rhett were pushed fromher mind by the excitement of seeing so many people and hearing music again. Tomorrow shewould think of Rhetts conduct and her shame and they would make her writhe again. Tomorrowshe would wonder if she had made any impression on Franks hurt and bewildered heart. But nottonight. Tonight she was alive to her finger tips, every sense alert with hope, her eyes sparkling.

She looked from the alcove into the huge drawing room and watched the dancers, rememberinghow beautiful this room had been when first she came to Atlanta during the war. Then thehardwood floors had shone like glass, and overhead the chandelier with its hundreds of tiny prismshad caught and reflected every ray of the dozens of candles it bore, flinging them, like gleams fromdiamonds, flame and sapphire about the room. The old portraits on the walls had been dignifiedand gracious and had looked down upon guests with an air of mellowed hospitality. The rosewoodsofas had been soft and inviting and one of them, the largest, had stood in the place of honor in thissame alcove where she now sat. It had been Scarletts favorite seat at parties. From this pointstretched the pleasant vista of drawing room and dining room beyond, the oval mahogany table which seated twenty and the twenty slim-legged chairs demurely against the walls, the massivesideboard and buffet weighted with heavy silver, with seven-branched candlesticks, goblets, cruets,decanters and shining little glasses. Scarlett had sat on that sofa so often in the first years of thewar, always with some handsome officer beside her, and listened to violin and bull fiddle, accordionand banjo, and heard the exciting swishing noises which dancing feet made on the waxedand polished floor.

Now the chandelier hung dark. It was twisted askew and most of the prisms were broken, as ifthe Yankee occupants had made their beauty a target for their boots. Now an oil lamp and a fewcandles lighted the room and the roaring fire in the wide hearth gave most of the illumination. Itsflickering light showed how irreparably scarred and splintered the dull old floor was. Squares onthe faded paper on the wall gave evidence that once the portraits had hung there, and wide cracksin the plaster recalled the day during the siege when a shell had exploded on the house and torn offparts of the roof and second floor. The heavy old mahogany table, spread with cake and decanters,still presided in the empty-looking dining room but it was scratched and the broken legs showedsigns of clumsy repair. The sideboard, the silver and the spindly chairs were gone. The dull-golddamask draperies which had covered the arching French windows at the back of the room weremissing, and only the remnants of the lace curtains remained, clean but obviously mended.

In place of the curved sofa she had liked so much was a hard bench that was none toocomfortable. She sat upon it with as good grace as possible, wishing her skirts were in suchcondition that she could dance. It would be so good to dance again. But, of course, she could domore with Frank in this sequestered alcove than in a breathless reel and she could listen fascinatedto his talk and encourage him to greater flights of foolishness.

But the music certainly was inviting. Her slipper patted longingly in time with old Levis largesplayed foot as he twanged a strident banjo and called the figures of the reel. Feet swished andscraped and patted as the twin lines danced toward each other, retreated, whirled and made archesof their arms.

Ole Dan Tucker he got drunk

(Swing yo padners!)Fell in de fiah an he kick up a chunk!

(Skip tight, ladies!)

After the dull and exhausting months at Tara it was good to hear music again and the sound ofdancing feet, good to see familiar friendly faces laughing in the feeble light, calling old jokes andcatchwords, bantering, rallying, coquetting. It was like coming to life again after being dead. Italmost seemed that the bright days of five years ago had come back again. If she could close hereyes and not see the worn made-over dresses and the patched boots and mended slippers, if hermind did not call up the faces of boys missing from the reel, she might almost think that nothinghad changed. But as she looked, watching the old men grouped about the decanter in the diningroom, the matrons lining the walls, talking behind fanless hands, and the swaying, skipping young dancers, it came to her suddenly, coldly, frighteningly that it was all as greatly changed as if thesefamiliar figures were ghosts.

They looked the same but they were different. What was it? Was it only that they were five yearsolder? No, it was something more than the passing of time. Something had gone out of them, outof their world. Five years ago, a feeling of security had wrapped them all around so gently theywere not even aware of it. In its shelter they had flowered. Now it was gone and with it had gonethe old thrill, the old sense of something delightful and exciting just around the corner, the oldglamour of their way of living.

She knew she had changed too, but not as they had changed, and it puzzled her. She sat andwatched them and she felt herself an alien among them, as alien and lonely as if she had comefrom another world, speaking a language they did not understand and she not understanding theirs.

Then she knew that this feeling was the same one she felt with Ashley. With him and with peopleof his kindand they made up most of her worldshe felt outside of something she could notunderstand.

Their faces were little changed and their manners not at all but it seemed to her that these twothings were all that remained of her old friends. An ageless dignity, a timeless gallantry still clungabout them and would cling until they died but they would carry undying bitterness to their graves,a bitterness too deep for words. They were a soft-spoken, fierce, tired people who were defeatedand would not know defeat, broken yet standing determinedly erect. They were crushed andhelpless, citizens of conquered provinces. They were looking on the state they loved, seeing ittrampled by the enemy, rascals making a mock of the law, their former slaves a menace, their mendisfranchised, their women insulted. And they were remembering graves.

Everything in their old world had changed but the old forms. The old usages went on, must goon, for the forms were all that were left to them. They were holding tightly to the things they knewbest and loved best in the old days, the leisured manners, the courtesy, the pleasant casualness inhuman contacts and, most of all, the protecting attitude of the men toward their women. True to thetradition in which they had been reared, the men were courteous and tender and they almostsucceeded in creating an atmosphere of sheltering their women from all that was harsh and unfitfor feminine eyes. That, thought Scarlett, was the height of absurdity, for there was little, now,which even the most cloistered women had not seen and known in the last five years. They hadnursed the wounded, closed dying eyes, suffered war and fire and devastation, known terror andflight and starvation.

But, no matter what sights they had seen, what menial tasks they had done and would have todo, they remained ladies and gentlemen, royalty in exilebitter, aloof, incurious, kind to oneanother, diamond hard, as bright and brittle as the crystals of the broken chandelier over theirheads. The old days had gone but these people would go their ways as if the old days still existed,charming, leisurely, determined not to rush and scramble for pennies as the Yankees did,determined to part with none of the old ways.

Scarlett knew that she, too, was greatly changed. Otherwise she could not have done the thingsshe had done since she was last in Atlanta; otherwise she would not now be contemplating doingwhat she desperately hoped to do. But there was a difference in their hardness and hers and just what the difference was, she could not, for the moment, tell. Perhaps it was that there was nothingshe would not do, and there were so many things these people would rather die than do. Perhaps itwas that they were without hope but still smiling at life, bowing gracefully and passing it by. Andthis Scarlett could not do.

She could not ignore life. She had to live it and it was too brutal, too hostile, for her even to tryto gloss over its harshness with a smile. Of the sweetness and courage and unyielding pride of herfriends, Scarlett saw nothing. She saw only a silly stiff-neckedness which observed facts butsmiled and refused to look them in the face.

As she stared at the dancers, flushed from the reel, she wondered if things drove them as shewas driven, dead lovers, maimed husbands, children who were hungry, acres slipping away,beloved roofs that sheltered strangers. But, of course, they driven! She knew theircircumstances only a little less thoroughly than she knew her own.(were) Their losses had been herlosses, their privations her privations, their problems her same problems. Yet they had reacteddifferently to them. The faces she was seeing in the room were not faces; they were masks,excellent masks which would never drop.

But if they were suffering as acutely from brutal circumstances as she wasand they werehow could they this air of gaiety and lightness of heart? Why, indeed, should they even try to do it?

They were beyond her comprehension and vaguely irritating. She couldnt be like them. Shecouldnt survey the wreck of the world with an air of casual unconcern. She was as hunted as afox, running with a bursting heart, trying to reach a burrow before the hounds caught up.

Suddenly she hated them all because they were different from her, because they carried theirlosses with an air that she could never attain, would never wish to attain. She hated them, thesesmiling, light-footed strangers, these proud fools who took pride in something they had lost,seeming to be proud that they had lost it. The women bore themselves like ladies and she knewthey were ladies, though menial tasks were their daily lot and they didnt know where their nextdress was coming from. Ladies all! But she could not feel herself a lady, for all her velvet dressand scented hair, for all the pride of birth that stood behind her and the pride of wealth that hadonce been hers. Harsh contact with the red earth of Tara had stripped gentility from her and sheknew she would never feel like a lady again until her table was weighted with silver and crystaland smoking with rich food, until her own horses and carriages stood in her stables, until blackhands and not white took the cotton from Tara.

Ah! she thought angrily, sucking in her breath. Thats the difference! Even though theyrepoor, they still feel like ladies and I dont. The silly fools dont seem to realize that you cant be alady without money!

Even in this flash of revelation, she realized vaguely that, foolish though they seemed, theirswas the right attitude. Ellen would have thought so. This disturbed her. She knew she should feelas these people felt, but she could not. She knew she should believe devoutly, as they did, that aborn lady remained a lady, even if reduced to poverty, but she could not make herself believe itnow.

All her life she had heard sneers hurled at the Yankees because their pretensions to gentilitywere based on wealth, not breeding. But at this moment, heresy though it was, she could not help thinking the Yankees were right on this one matter, even if wrong in all others. It took money to bea lady. She knew Ellen would have fainted had she ever heard such words from her daughter. Nodepth of poverty could ever have made Ellen feel ashamed. Ashamed! Yet, that was how Scarlettfelt. Ashamed that she was poor and reduced to galling shifts and penury and work that negroesshould do.

She shrugged in irritation. Perhaps these people were right and she was wrong but, just thesame, these proud fools werent looking forward as she was doing, straining every nerve, riskingeven honor and good name to get back what they had lost. It was beneath the dignity of any ofthem to indulge in a scramble for money. The times were rude and hard. They called for rude andhard struggle if one was to conquer them. Scarlett knew that family tradition would forciblyrestrain many of these people from such a strugglewith the making of money admittedly its aim.

They all thought that obvious money-making and even talk of money were vulgar in the extreme.

Of course, there were exceptions. Mrs. Merriwether and her baking and Ren driving the piewagon. And Hugh Elsing cutting and peddling firewood and Tommy contracting. And Frankhaving the gumption to start a store. But what of the rank and file of them? The planters wouldscratch a few acres and live in poverty. The lawyers and doctors would go back to their professionsand wait for clients who might never come. And the rest, those who had lived in leisure on theirincomes? What would happen to them?

But she wasnt going to be poor all her life. She wasnt going to sit down and patiently wait fora miracle to help her. She was going to rush into life and wrest from it what she could. Her fatherhad started as a poor immigrant boy and had won the broad acres of Tara. What he had done, hisdaughter could do. She wasnt like these people who had gambled everything on a Cause that wasgone and were content to be proud of having lost that Cause, because it was worth any sacrifice.

They drew their courage from the past. She was drawing hers from the future. Frank Kennedy, atpresent, was her future. At least, he had the store and he had cash money. And if she could onlymarry him and get her hands on that money, she could make ends meet at Tara for another year.

And after thatFrank must buy the sawmill. She could see for herself how quickly the town wasrebuilding and anyone who could establish a lumber business now, when there was so littlecompetition, would have a gold mine.

There came to her, from the recesses of her mind, words Rhett had spoken in the early years ofthe war about the money he made in the blockade. She had not taken the trouble to understandthem then, but now they seemed perfectly clear and she wondered if it had been only her youth orplain stupidity which had kept her from appreciating them.

Theres just as much money to be made in the wreck of a civilization as in the upbuilding ofone.

This is the wreck he foresaw, she thought, and he was right. Theres still plenty of money tobe made by anyone who isnt afraid to workor to grab.

She saw Frank coming across the floor toward her with a glass of blackberry wine in his handand a morsel of cake on a saucer and she pulled her face into a smile. It did not occur to her toquestion whether Tara was worth marrying Frank. She knew it was worth it and she never gave thematter a second thought.

She smiled up at him as she sipped the wine, knowing that her cheeks were more attractivelypink than any of the dancers. She moved her skirts for him to sit by her and waved herhandkerchief idly so that the faint sweet smell of the cologne could reach his nose. She was proudof the cologne, for no other woman in the room was wearing any and Frank had noticed it. In a fitof daring he had whispered to her that she was as pink and fragrant as a rose.

If only he were not so shy! He reminded her of a timid old brown field rabbit. If only he had thegallantry and ardor of the Tarleton boys or even the coarse impudence of Rhett Butler. But, if hepossessed those qualities, hed probably have sense enough to feel the desperation that lurked justbeneath her demurely fluttering eyelids. As it was, he didnt know enough about women even tosuspect what she was up to. That was her good fortune but it did not increase her respect for him.

Chapter 36

SHE MARRIED Frank Kennedy two weeks later after a whirlwind courtship which sheblushingly told him left her too breathless to oppose his ardor any longer.

He did not know that during those two weeks she had walked the floor at night, gritting her teethat the slowness with which he took hints and encouragements, praying that no untimely letter fromSuellen would reach him and ruin her plans. She thanked God that her sister was the poorest ofcorrespondents, delighting to receive letters and disliking to write them. But there was always achance, always a chance, she thought in the long night hours as she padded back and forth acrossthe cold floor of her bedroom, with Ellens faded shawl clutched about her nightdress. Frank didnot know she had received a laconic letter from Will, relating that Jonas Wilkerson had paidanother call at Tara and, finding her gone to Atlanta, had stormed about until Will and Ashleythrew him bodily off the place. Wills letter hammered into her mind the fact she knew only toowellthat time was getting shorter and shorter before the extra taxes must be paid. A fierce desperationdrove her as she saw the days slipping by and she wished she might grasp the hourglass inher hands and keep the sands from running.

But so well did she conceal her feelings, so well did she enact her role, Frank suspected nothing,saw no more than what lay on the surfacethe pretty and helpless young widow of CharlesHamilton who greeted him every night in Miss Pittypats parlor and listened, breathless withadmiration, as he told of future plans for his store and how much money he expected to make whenhe was able to buy the sawmill. Her sweet sympathy and her bright-eyed interest in every word heuttered were balm upon the wound left by Suellens supposed defection. His heart was sore andbewildered at Suellens conduct and his vanity, the shy, touchy vanity of a middle-aged bachelorwho knows himself to be unattractive to women, was deeply wounded. He could not write Suellen,upbraiding her for her faithlessness; he shrank from the very idea. But he could ease his heart bytalking about her to Scarlett. Without saying a disloyal word about Suellen, she could tell him sheunderstood how badly her sister had treated him and what good treatment he merited from awoman who really appreciated him.

Little Mrs. Hamilton was such a pretty pink-cheeked person, alternating between melancholysighs when she thought of her sad plight, and laughter as gay and sweet as the tinkling of tinysilver bells when he made small jokes to cheer her. Her green gown, now neatly cleaned by Mammy, showed off her slender figure with its tiny waist to perfection, and how bewitching wasthe faint fragrance which always clung about her handkerchief and her hair! It was a shame thatsuch a fine little woman should be alone and helpless in a world so rough that she didnt evenunderstand its harshness. No husband nor brother nor even a father now to protect her. Frankthought the world too rude a place for a lone woman and, in that idea, Scarlett silently and heartilyconcurred.

He came to call every night, for the atmosphere of Pittys house was pleasant and soothing.

Mammys smile at the front door was the smile reserved for quality folks, Pitty served him coffeelaced with brandy and fluttered about him and Scarlett hung on his every utterance. Sometimes inthe afternoons he took Scarlett riding with him in his buggy when he went out on business. Theserides were merry affairs because she asked so many foolish questionsjust like a woman, hetold himself approvingly. He couldnt help laughing at her ignorance about business matters andshe laughed too, saying: Well, of course, you cant expect a silly little woman like me tounderstand mens affairs.

She made him feel, for the first time in his old-maidish life, that he was a strong upstanding manfashioned by God in a nobler mold than other men, fashioned to protect silly helpless women.

When, at last, they stood together to be married, her confiding little hand in his and herdowncast lashes throwing thick black crescents on her pink cheeks, he still did not know how it allcame about. He only knew he had done something romantic and exciting for the first time in hislife. He, Frank Kennedy, had swept this lovely creature off her feet and into his strong arms. Thatwas a heady feeling.

No friend or relative stood up with them at their marriage. The witnesses were strangers calledin from the street. Scarlett had insisted on that and he had given in, though reluctantly, for hewould have liked his sister and his brother-in-law from Jonesboro to be with him. And a receptionwith toasts drunk to the bride in Miss Pittys parlor amid happy friends would have been a joy tohim. But Scarlett would not hear of even Miss Pitty being present.

Just us two, Frank, she begged, squeezing his arm. Like an elopement. I always did want torun away and be married! Please, sweetheart, just for me!

It was that endearing term, still so new to his ears, and the bright teardrops which edged her palegreen eyes as she looked up pleadingly at him that won him over. After all, a man had to makesome concessions to his bride, especially about the wedding, for women set such a store bysentimental things.

And before he knew it, he was married.

Frank gave her the three hundred dollars, bewildered by her sweet urgency, reluctant at first,because it meant the end of his hope of buying the sawmill immediately. But he could not see herfamily evicted, and his disappointment soon faded at the sight of her radiant happiness,disappeared entirely at the loving way she took on over his generosity. Frank had never beforehad a woman take on over him and he came to feel that the money had been well spent, after all.

Scarlett dispatched Mammy to Tara immediately for the triple purpose of giving Will the money, announcing her marriage and bringing Wade to Atlanta. In two days she had a brief note from Willwhich she carried about with her and read and reread with mounting joy. Will wrote that the taxeshad been paid and Jonas Wilkerson acted up pretty bad at the news but had made no other threatsso far. Will closed by wishing her happiness, a laconic formal statement which he qualified in noway. She knew Win understood what she had done and why she had done it and neither blamed norpraised. But what must Ashley think? she wondered feverishly. What must he think of me now,after what I said to him so short a while ago in the orchard at Tara?

She also had a letter from Suellen, poorly spelled, violent, abusive, tear splotched, a letter so fullof venom and truthful observations upon her character that she was never to forget it nor forgivethe writer. But even Suellens words could not dim her happiness that Tara was safe, at least fromimmediate danger.

It was hard to realize that Atlanta and not Tara was her permanent home now. In her desperationto obtain the tax money, no thought save Tara and the fate which threatened it had any place in hermind. Even at the moment of marriage, she had not given a thought to the fact that the price shewas paying for the safety of home was permanent exile from it. Now that the deed was done, sherealized this with a wave of homesickness hard to dispel. But there it was. She had made herbargain and she intended to stand by it. And she was so grateful to Frank for saving Tara she felt awarm affection for him and an equally warm determination that he should never regret marryingher.

The ladies of Atlanta knew their neighbors business only slightly less completely than theyknew their own and were far more interested in it. They all knew that for years Frank Kennedy hadhad an understanding with Suellen OHara. In fact, he had said, sheepishly, that he expected toget married in the spring. So the tumult of gossip, surmise and deep suspicion which followed theannouncement of his quiet wedding to Scarlett was not surprising. Mrs. Merriwether, who never lether curiosity go long unsatisfied if she could help it, asked him point-blank just what he meant bymarrying one sister when he was betrothed to the other. She reported to Mrs. Elsing that all theanswer she got for her pains was a silly look. Not even Mrs. Merriwether, doughty soul that shewas, dared to approach Scarlett on the subject. Scarlett seemed demure and sweet enough thesedays, but there was a pleased complacency in her eyes which annoyed people and she carried achip on her shoulder which no one cared to disturb.

She knew Atlanta was talking but she did not care. After all, there wasnt anything immoral inmarrying a man. Tare was safe. Let people talk. She had too many other matters to occupy hermind. The most important was how to make Frank realize, in a tactful manner, that his store shouldbring in more money. After the fright Jonas Wilkerson had given her, she would never rest easyuntil she and Frank had some money ahead. And even if no emergency developed, Frank wouldneed to make more money, if she was going to save enough for next years taxes. Moreover, whatFrank had said about the sawmill stuck in her mind. Frank could make lots of money out of a mill.

Anybody could, with lumber selling at such outrageous prices. She fretted silently because Franksmoney had not been enough to pay the taxes on Tara and buy the mill as well. And she made upher mind that he had to make more money on the store somehow, and do it quickly, so he couldbuy that mill before some one else snapped it up. She could see it was a bargain.

If she were a man she would have that mill, if she had to mortgage the store to raise the money.

But, when she intimated this delicately to Frank, the day after they married, he smiled and told hernot to bother her sweet pretty little head about business matters. It had come as a surprise to himthat she even knew what a mortgage was and, at first, he was amused. But this amusement quicklypassed and a sense of shock took its place in the early days of their marriage. Once, incautiously,he had told her that people (he was careful not to mention names) owed him money but couldnot pay just now and he was, of course, unwilling to press old friends and gentlefolk. Frankregretted ever mentioning it for, thereafter, she had questioned him about it again and again. Shehad the most charmingly childlike air but she was just curious, she said, to know who owed himand how much they owed. Frank was very evasive about the matter. He coughed nervously andwaved his hands and repeated his annoying remark about her sweet pretty little head.

It had begun to dawn on him that this same sweet pretty little head was a good head forfigures. In fact, a much better one than his own and the knowledge was disquieting. He wasthunderstruck to discover that she could swiftly add a long column of figures in her head when heneeded a pencil and paper for more than three figures. And fractions presented no difficulties to herat all. He felt there was something unbecoming about a woman understanding fractions andbusiness matters and he believed that, should be unfortunate as to have such unladylikecomprehension,sheshouldpretendnott(a) o.Nowh(woman) edislik(so) ed talking business with her asmuch as be had enjoyed it before they were married. Then he had thought it all beyond her mentalgrasp and it had been pleasant to explain things to her. Now he saw that she understood entirely toowell and he felt the usual masculine indignation at the duplicity of women. Added to it was theusual masculine disillusionment in discovering that a woman has a brain.

Just how early in his married life Frank learned of the deception Scarlett had used in marryinghim, no one ever knew. Perhaps the truth dawned on him when Tony Fontaine, obviously fancyfree, came to Atlanta on business. Perhaps it was told him more directly in letters from his sister inJonesboro who was astounded at his marriage. Certainly he never learned from Suellen herself.

She never wrote him and naturally he could not write her and explain. What good wouldexplanations do anyway, now that he was married? He writhed inwardly at the thought that Suellenwould never know the truth and would always think he had senselessly jilted her. Probablyeveryone else was thinking this too and criticizing him. It certainly put him in an awkwardposition. And he had no way of clearing himself, for a man couldnt go about saying he had lost hishead about a womanand a gentleman couldnt advertise the fact that his wife had entrapped himwith a lie.

Scarlett was his wife and a wife was entitled to the loyalty of her husband. Furthermore, hecould not bring himself to believe she had married him coldly and with no affection for him at all.

His masculine vanity would not permit such a thought to stay long in his mind. It was morepleasant to think she had fallen so suddenly in love with him she had been willing to lie to get him.

But it was all very puzzling. He knew he was no great catch for a woman half his age and prettyand smart to boot, but Frank was a gentleman and he kept his bewilderment to himself. Scarlettwas his wife and he could not insult her by asking awkward questions which, after all, would notremedy matters.

Not that Frank especially wanted to remedy matters, for it appeared that his marriage would be ahappy one. Scarlett was the most charming and exciting of women and he thought her perfect in all thingsexcept that she was so headstrong. Frank learned early in his marriage that so long as shehad her own way, life could be very pleasant, but when she was opposed Given her own way,she was as gay as a child, laughed a good deal, made foolish little jokes, sat on his knee andtweaked his beard until he vowed he felt twenty years younger. She could be unexpectedly sweetand thoughtful, having his slippers toasting at the fire when he came home at night, fussingaffectionately about his wet feet and interminable head colds, remembering that he always likedthe gizzard of the chicken and three spoonfuls of sugar in his coffee. Yes, life was very sweet andcozy with Scarlettas long as she had her own way.

When the marriage was two weeks old, Frank contracted the grippe and Dr. Meade put him tobed. In the first year of the war, Frank had spent two months in the hospital with pneumonia and hehad lived in dread of another attack since that time, so he was only too glad to lie sweating underthree blankets and drink the hot concoctions Mammy and Aunt Pitty brought him every hour.

The illness dragged on and Frank worried more and more about the store as each day passed.

The place was in charge of the counter boy, who came to the house every night to report on thedays transactions, but Frank was not satisfied. He fretted until Scarlett who had only been waitingfor such an opportunity laid a cool hand on his forehead and said: Now, sweetheart, I shall bevexed if you take on so. Ill go to town and see how things are.

And she went, smiling as she smothered his feeble protests. During the three weeks of her newmarriage, she had been in a fever to see his account books and find out just how money mattersstood. What luck that he was bedridden!

The store stood near Five Points, its new roof glaring against the smoked bricks of the old walls.

Wooden awnings covered the sidewalk to the edge of the street, and at the long iron barsconnecting the uprights horses and mules were hitched, their heads bowed against the cold mistyrain, their backs covered with torn blankets and quilts. The inside of the store was almost likeBullards store in Jonesboro, except that there were no loungers about the roaring red-hot stove,whittling and spitting streams of tobacco juice at the sand boxes. It was bigger than Bullards storeand much darker. The wooden awnings cut off most of the winter daylight and the interior was dimand dingy, only a trickle of light coming in through the small fly-specked windows high up on theside walls. The floor was covered with muddy sawdust and everywhere was dust and dirt. Therewas a semblance of order in the front of the store, where tall shelves rose into the gloom stackedwith bright bolts of cloth, china, cooking utensils and notions. But in the back, behind the partition,chaos reigned.

Here there was no flooring and the assorted jumble of stock was piled helter-skelter on the hard-packed earth. In the semi-darkness she saw boxes and bales of goods, plows and harness andsaddles and cheap pine coffins. Secondhand furniture, ranging from cheap gum to mahogany androsewood, reared up in the gloom, and the rich but worn brocade and horsehair upholstery gleamedincongruously in the dingy surroundings. China chambers and bowl and pitcher sets littered thefloor and all around the four walls were deep bins, so dark she had to hold the lamp directly overthem to discover they contained seeds, nails, bolts and carpenters tools.

Id think a man as fussy and old maidish as Frank would keep things tidier, she thought, scrubbing her grimy hands with her handkerchief. This place is a pig pen. What a way to run astore! If hed only dust up this stuff and put it out in front where folks could see it, he could sellthings much quicker.

And if his stock was in such condition, what mustnt his accounts be!

Ill look at his account book now, she thought and, picking up the lamp, she went into the frontof the store. Willie, the counter boy, was reluctant to give her the large dirty-backed ledger. It wasobvious that, young as he was, he shared Franks opinion that women had no place in business. ButScarlett silenced him with a sharp word and sent him out to get his dinner. She felt better when hewas gone, for his disapproval annoyed her, and she settled herself in a split-bottomed chair by theroaring stove, tucked one foot under her and spread the book across her lap. It was dinner time andthe streets were deserted. No customers called and she had the store to herself.

She turned the pages slowly, narrowly scanning the rows of names and figures written in Frankscramped copperplate hand. It was just as she had expected, and she frowned as she saw this newestevidence of Franks lack of business sense. At least five hundred dollars in debts, some of themmonths old, were set down against the names of people she knew well, the Merriwethers and theElsings among other familiar names. From Franks deprecatory remarks about the money people

owed him, she had imagined the sums to be small. But this!

If they cant pay, why do they keep on buying? she thought irritably. And if he knows theycant pay, why does he keep on selling them stuff? Lots of them could pay if hed just make themdo it. The Elsings certainly could if they could give Fanny a new satin dress and an expensivewedding. Franks just too soft hearted, and people take advantage of him. Why, if hed collectedhalf this money, he could have bought the sawmill and easily spared me the tax money, too.

Then she thought: Just imagine Frank trying to operate a sawmill! Gods nightgown! If he runsthis store like a charitable institution, how could he expect to make money on a mill? The sheriffwould have it in a month. Why, I could run this store better than he does! And I could run a millbetter than he could, even if I dont know anything about the lumber business!

A startling thought this, that a woman could handle business matters as well as or better than aman, a revolutionary thought to Scarlett who had been reared in the tradition that men wereomniscient and women none too bright. Of course, she had discovered that this was not altogethertrue but the pleasant fiction still stuck in her mind. Never before had she put this remarkable ideainto words. She sat quite still, with the heavy book across her lap, her mouth a little open withsurprise, thinking that during the lean months at Tara she had done a mans work and done it well.

She had been brought up to believe that a woman alone could accomplish nothing, yet she hadmanaged the plantation without men to help her until Will came. Why, why, her mind stuttered, Ibelieve women could manage everything in the world without mens helpexcept having babies,and God knows, no woman in her right mind would have babies if she could help it.

With the idea that she was as capable as a man came a sudden rush of pride and a violentlonging to prove it, to make money for herself as men made money. Money which would be herown, which she would neither have to ask for nor account for to any man.

I wish I had money enough to buy that mill myself, she said aloud and sighed. Id sure make it hum. And I wouldnt let even one splinter go out on credit.

She sighed again. There was nowhere she could get any money, so the idea was out of thequestion. Frank would simply have to collect this money owing him and buy the mill. It was a sureway to make money, and when he got the mill, she would certainly find some way to make him bemore businesslike in its operation than he had been with the store.

She pulled a back page out of the ledger and began copying the list of debtors who had made nopayments in several months. Shed take the matter up with Frank just as soon as she reached home.

Shed make him realize that these people had to pay their bills even if they were old friends, evenif it did embarrass him to press them for money. That would probably upset Frank, for he wastimid and fond of the approbation of his friends. He was so thin skinned hed rather lose the moneythan be businesslike about collecting it.

And hed probably tell her that no one had any money with which to pay him. Well, perhaps thatwas true. Poverty was certainly no news to her. But nearly everybody had saved some silver orjewelry or was hanging on to a little real estate. Frank could take them in lieu of cash.

She could imagine how Frank would moan when she broached such an idea to him. Take the.

jewelry and property of his friends! Well, she shrugged, he can moan all he likes. Im going to tellhim that he may be willing to stay poor for friendships sake but Im not. Frank will never getanywhere if he doesnt get up some gumption. And hes got to get somewhere! Hes got to makemoney, even if Ive got to wear the pants in the family to make him do it.

She was writing busily, her face screwed up with the effort, her tongue clamped between herteeth, when the front door opened and a great draft of cold wind swept the store. A tall man cameinto the dingy room walking with a light Indian-like tread, and looking up she saw Rhett Butler.

He was resplendent in new clothes and a greatcoat with a dashing cape thrown back from hisheavy shoulders. His tall hat was off in a deep bow when her eyes met his and his hand went to thebosom of a spotless pleated shirt. His white teeth gleamed startlingly against his brown face andhis bold eyes raked her.

My dear Mrs. Kennedy, he said, walking toward her. My very dear Mrs. Kennedy! and hebroke into a loud merry laugh.

At first she was as startled as if a ghost had invaded the store and then, hastily removing her footfrom beneath her, she stiffened her spine and gave him a cold stare.

What are you doing here?

I called on Miss Pittypat and learned of your marriage and so I hastened here to congratulateyou.

The memory of her humiliation at his hands made her go crimson with shame.

I dont see how you have the gall to face me! she cried.

On the contrary! How have you the gall to face me?

Oh, you are the most

Shall we let the bugles sing truce? he smiled down at her, a wide flashing smile that had impudence in it but no shame for his own actions or condemnation for hers. In spite of herself, shehad to smile too, but it was a wry, uncomfortable smile.

What a pity they didnt hang you!

Others share your feeling, I fear. Come, Scarlett, relax. You look like youd swallowed aramrod and it isnt becoming. Surely, youve had time to recover from myermy little joke.

Joke? Ha! Ill never get over it!

Oh, yes, you will. You are just putting on this indignant front because you think its proper andrespectable. May I sit down?

No.

He sank into a chair beside her and grinned.

I hear you couldnt even wait two weeks for me, he said and gave a mock sigh. How fickle iswoman!

When she did not reply he continued.

Tell me, Scarlett, just between friendsbetween very old and very intimate friendswouldntit have been wiser to wait until I got out of jail? Or are the charms of wedlock with old FrankKennedy more alluring than illicit relations with me?

As always when his mockery aroused wrath within her, wrath fought with laughter at hisimpudence.

Dont be absurd.

And would you mind satisfying my curiosity on one point which has bothered me for sometime? Did you have no womanly repugnance, no delicate shrinking from marrying not just oneman but two for whom you had no love or even affection? Or have I been misinformed about thedelicacy of our Southern womanhood?

Rhett!

I have my answer. I always felt that women had a hardness and endurance unknown to men,despite the pretty idea taught me in childhood that women are frail, tender, sensitive creatures. Butafter all, according to the Continental code of etiquette, its very bad form for husband and wife tolove each other. Very bad taste, indeed. I always felt that the Europeans had the right idea in thatmatter. Marry for convenience and love for pleasure. A sensible system, dont you think? You arecloser to the old country than I thought.

How pleasant it would be to shout at him: I did not marry for convenience! But unfortunately,Rhett had her there and any protest of injured innocence would only bring more barbed remarksfrom him.

How you do run on, she said coolly. Anxious to change the subject, she asked: How did youever get out of jail?

Oh, that! he answered, making an airy gesture. Not much trouble. They let me out thismorning. I employed a delicate system of blackmail on a friend in Washington who is quite high in the councils of the Federal government. A splendid fellowone of the staunch Union patriots fromwhom I used to buy muskets and hoop skirts for the Confederacy. When my distressingpredicament was brought to his attention in the right way, he hastened to use his influence, and so Iwas released. Influence is everything, and guilt or innocence merely an academic question.

Ill take oath you werent innocent.

No, now that I am free of the toils, Ill frankly admit that Im as guilty as Cain. I did kill thenigger. He was uppity to a lady, and what else could a Southern gentleman do? And while Imconfessing, I must admit that I shot a Yankee cavalryman after some words in a barroom. I was notcharged with that peccadillo, so perhaps some other poor devil has been hanged for it, long since.

He was so blithe about his murders her blood chilled. Words of moral indignation rose to herlips but suddenly she remembered the Yankee who lay under the tangle of scuppernong vines atTara. He had not been on her conscience any more than a roach upon which she might havestepped. She could not sit in judgment on Rhett when she was as guilty as he.

And, as I seem to be making a clean breast of it, I must tell you, in strictest confidence (thatmeans, dont tell Miss Pittypat!) that I did have the money, safe in a bank in Liverpool.

The money?

Yes, the money the Yankees were so curious about. Scarlett, it wasnt altogether meanness thatkept me from giving you the money you wanted. If Id drawn a draft they could have traced itsomehow and I doubt if youd have gotten a cent. My only hope lay in doing nothing. I knew themoney was pretty safe, for if worst came to worst, if they had located it and tried to take it awayfrom me, I would have named every Yankee patriot who sold me bullets and machinery during thewar. Then there would have been a stink, for some of them are high up in Washington now. In fact,it was my threat to unbosom my conscience about them that got me out of jail. I

Do you mean youyou actually have the Confederate gold?

Not all of it. Good Heavens, no! There must be fifty or more ex-blockaders who have plentysalted away in Nassau and England and Canada. We will be pretty unpopular with theConfederates who werent as slick as we were. I have got close to half a million. Just think, Scarlett,a half-million dollars, if youd only restrained your fiery nature and not rushed into wedlockagain!

A half-million dollars. She felt a pang of almost physical sickness at the thought of so muchmoney. His jeering words passed over her head and she did not even hear them. It was hard tobelieve there was so much money in all this bitter and poverty-stricken world. So much money, sovery much money, and someone else had it, someone who took it lightly and didnt need it. Andshe had only a sick elderly husband and this dirty, piddling, little store between her and a hostileworld. It wasnt fair that a reprobate like Rhett Butler should have so much and she, who carried soheavy a load, should have so little. She hated him, sitting there in his dandified attire, taunting her.

Well, she wouldnt swell his conceit by complimenting him on his cleverness. She longedviciously for sharp words with which to cut him.

I suppose you think its honest to keep the Confederate money. Well, it isnt. Its plain out andout stealing and you know it. I wouldnt have that on my conscience.

My! How sour the grapes are today! he exclaimed, screwing up his face. And just whom amI stealing from?

She was silent, trying to think just whom indeed. After all, he had only done what Frank haddone on a small scale.

Half the money is honestly mine, he continued, honestly made with the aid of honest Unionpatriots who were willing to sell out the Union behind its backfor one-hundred-per-cent profiton their goods. Part I made out of my little investment in cotton at the beginning of the war, thecotton I bought cheap and sold for a dollar a pound when the British mills were crying for it. Part Igot from food speculation. Why should I let the Yankees have the fruits of my labor? But the restdid belong to the Confederacy. It came from Confederate cotton which I managed to run throughthe blockade and sell in Liverpool at sky-high prices. The cotton was given me in good faith to buyleather and rifles and machinery with. And it was taken by me in good, faith to buy the same. Myorders were to leave the gold in English banks, under my own name, in order that my credit wouldbe good. You remember when the blockade tightened, I couldnt get a boat out of any Confederateport or into one, so there the money stayed in England. What should I have done? Drawn out allthat gold from English banks, like a simpleton, and tried to run it into Wilmington? And let theYankees capture it? Was it my fault that the blockade got too tight? Was it my fault that our Causefailed? The money belonged to the Confederacy. Well, there is no Confederacy nowthoughyoud never know it, to hear some people talk. Whom shall I give the money to? The Yankeegovernment? I should so hate for people to think me a thief.

He removed a leather case from his pocket, extracted a long cigar and smelled it approvingly,meanwhile watching her with pseudo anxiety as if he hung on her words.

Plague take him, she thought, hes always one jump ahead of me. There is always somethingwrong with his arguments but I never can put my finger on just what it is.

You might, she said with dignity, distribute it to those who are in need. The Confederacy isgone but there are plenty of Confederates and their families who are starving.

He threw back his head and laughed rudely.

You are never so charming or so absurd as when you are airing some hypocrisy like that, hecried in frank enjoyment. Always tell the truth, Scarlett. You cant lie. The Irish are the poorestliars in the world. Come now, be frank. You gave damn about the late lamented ConfederacyandyoucarelessaboutthestarvingConfe(never) derates.(a) Youd scream in protest if I evensuggested giving away all the money unless I started off by giving you the lions share.

I dont want your money, she began, trying to be coldly dignified.

Oh, dont you! Your palm is itching to beat the band this minute. If I showed you a quarter,youd leap on it.

If you have come here to insult me and laugh at my poverty, I will wish you good day, sheretorted, trying to rid her lap of the heavy ledger so she might rise and make her words moreimpressive. Instantly, he was on his feet bending over her, laughing as he pushed her back into herchair.

When will you ever get over losing your temper when you hear the truth? You never mindspeaking the truth about other people, so why should you mind hearing it about yourself? Im notinsulting you. I think acquisitiveness is a very fine quality.

She was not sure what acquisitiveness meant but as he praised it she felt slightly mollified.

I didnt come to gloat over your poverty but to wish you long life and happiness in yourmarriage. By the way, what did sister Sue think of your larceny?

My what?

Your stealing Frank from under her nose.

I did not

Well, we wont quibble about the word. What did she say?

She said nothing, said Scarlett. His eyes danced as they gave her the lie.

How unselfish of her. Now, lets hear about your poverty. Surely I have the right to know, afteryour little trip out to the jail not long ago. Hasnt Frank as much money as you hoped?

There was no evading his impudence. Either she would have to put up with it or ask him toleave. And now she did not want him to leave. His words were barbed but they were the barbs oftruth. He knew what she had done and why she had done it and he did not seem to think the less ofher for it. And though his questions were unpleasantly blunt, they seemed actuated by a friendlyinterest. He was one person to whom she could tell the truth. That would be, a relief, for it hadbeen so long since she had told anyone the truth about herself and her motives. Whenever shespoke her mind everyone seemed to be shocked. Talking to Rhett was comparable only to onething, the feeling of ease and comfort afforded by a pair of old slippers after dancing in a pair tootight.

Didnt you get the money for the taxes? Dont tell me the wolf is still at the door of Tara.

There was a different tone in his voice.

She looked up to meet his dark eyes and caught an expression which startled and puzzled her atfirst, and then made her suddenly smile, a sweet and charming smile which was seldom on her facethese days. What a perverse wretch he was, but how nice he could be at times! She knew now thatthe real reason for his call was not to tease her but to make sure she had gotten the money forwhich she had been so desperate. She knew now that he had hurried to her as soon as he wasreleased, without the slightest appearance of hurry, to tend her the money if she still needed it. Andyet he would torment and insult her and deny that such was his intent, should she accuse him. Hewas quite beyond all comprehension. Did he really care about her, more than he was willing toadmit? Or did he have some other motive? Probably the latter, she thought. But who could tell? Hedid such strange things sometimes.

No, she said, the wolf isnt at the door any longer. II got the money.

But not without a struggle, Ill warrant. Did you manage to restrain yourself until you got thewedding ring on your finger?

She tried not to smile at his accurate summing up of her conduct but she could not help dimpling. He seated himself again, sprawling his long legs comfortably.

Well, tell me about your poverty. Did Frank, the brute, mislead you about his prospects? Heshould be soundly thrashed for taking advantage of a helpless female. Come, Scarlett. tell meeverything. You should have no secrets from me. Surely, I know the worst about you.

Oh, Rhett. youre the worstwell, I dont know what! No, he didnt exactly fool me but

Suddenly it became a pleasure to unburden herself. Rhett, if Frank would just collect the moneypeople owe him, I wouldnt be worried about anything. But, Rhett, fifty people owe him and hewont press them. Hes so thin skinned. He says a gentleman cant do that to another gentleman.

And it may be months and may be never before we get the money.

Well, what of it? Havent you enough to eat on until he does collect?

Yes, butwell, as a matter of fact, I could use a little money right now. Her eyes brightenedas she thought of the mill. PerhapsWhat for? More taxes?

Is that any of your business?

Yes, because you are getting ready to touch me for a loan. Oh, I know all the approaches. AndIll lend it to youwithout, my dear Mrs. Kennedy, that charming collateral you offered me ashort while ago. Unless, of course, you insist.

You are the coarsest

Not at all. I merely wanted to set your mind at ease. I knew youd be worried about that point.

Not much worried but a little. And Im willing to lend you the money. But I do want to know howyou are going to spend it. I have that right, I believe. If its to buy you pretty frocks or a carriage,take it with my blessing. But if its to buy a new pair of breeches for Ashley Wilkes, I fear I mustdecline to lend it.

She was hot with sudden rage and she stuttered until words came.

Ashley Wilkes has never taken a cent from me! I couldnt make him take a cent if he werestarving! You dont understand him, how honorable, how proud he is! Of course, you cantunderstand him, being what you are

Dont lets begin calling names. I could call you a few that would match any you could think offor me. You forget that I have been keeping up with you through Miss Pittypat, and the dear soultells all she knows to any sympathetic listener. I know that Ashley has been at Tara ever since hecame home from Rock Island. I know that you have even put up with having his wife around,which must have been a strain on you.

Ashley is

Oh, yes, he said, waving his hand negligently. Ashley is too sublime for my earthycomprehension. But please dont forget I was an interested witness to your tender scene with himat Twelve Oaks and something tells me he hasnt changed since then. And neither have you. Hedidnt cut so sublime a figure that day, if I remember rightly. And I dont think the figure he cutsnow is much better. Why doesnt he take his family and get out and find work? And stop living at Tara? Of course, its just a whim of mine, but I dont intend to tend you a cent for Tara to helpsupport him. Among men, theres a very unpleasant name for men who permit women to supportthem.

How dare you say such things? Hes been working like a field hand! For all her rage, her heartwas wrung by the memory of Ashley splitting fence rails.

And worth his weight in gold, I dare say. What a hand he must be with the manure and

Hes

Oh, yes, I know. Lets grant that he does the best he can but I dont imagine hes much help.

Youll never make a farm hand out of a Wilkesor anything else thats useful. The breed is purelyornamental. Now, quiet your ruffled feathers and overlook my boorish remarks about the proudand honorable Ashley. Strange how these illusions will persist even in women as hard headed asyou are. How much money do you want and what do you want it for?

When she did not answer he repeated:

What do you want it for? And see if you can manage to tell me the truth. It will do as well as alie. In fact, better, for if you lie to me, Ill be sure to find it out, and think how embarrassing thatwould be. Always remember this, Scarlett, I can stand anything from you but a lieyour dislikefor me, your tempers, all your vixenish ways, but not a lie. Now what do you want it for?

Raging as she was at his attack on Ashley, she would have given anything to spit on him andthrow his offer of money proudly into his mocking face. For a moment she almost did, but the coldhand of common sense held her back. She swallowed her anger with poor grace and tried toassume an expression of pleasant dignity. He leaned back in his chair, stretching his legs towardthe stove.

If theres one thing in the world that gives me more amusement than anything else, heremarked, its the sight of your mental struggles when a matter of principle is laid up againstsomething practical like money. Of course, I know the practical in you will always win, but I keephanging around to see if your better nature wont triumph some day. And when that day comes Ishall pack my bag and leave Atlanta forever. There are too many women whose better natures arealways triumphing. ... Well, lets get back to business. How much and what for?

I dont know quite how much Ill need, she said sulkily. But I want to buy a sawmilland Ithink I can get it cheap. And Ill need two wagons and two mules. I want good mules, too. And ahorse and buggy for my own use.

A sawmill?

Yes, and if youll lend me the money, Ill give you a half-interest in it.

Whatever would I do with a sawmill?

Make money! We can make loads of money. Or Ill pay you interest on the loanlets see,what is good interest?

Fifty per cent is considered very fine.

Fiftyoh, but you are joking! Stop laughing, you devil. Im serious.

Thats why Im laughing. I wonder if anyone but me realizes what goes on in that head back ofyour deceptively sweet face.

Well, who cares? Listen, Rhett, and see if this doesnt sound like good business to you. Franktold me about this man who has a sawmill, a little one out Peachtree road, and be wants to sell it.

Hes got to have cash money pretty quick and hell sell it cheap. There arent many sawmillsaround here now, and the way people are rebuildingwhy, we could sell lumber sky high. Theman will stay and run the mill for a wage. Frank told me about it. Frank would buy the millhimself if he had the money. I guess he was intending buying it with the money he gave me for thetaxes.

Poor Frank! What is he going to say when you tell him youve bought it yourself right out fromunder him? And how are you going to explain my lending you the money without compromisingyour reputation?

Scarlett had given no thought to this, so intent was she upon the money the mill would bring in.

Well, I just wont tell him.

Hell know you didnt pick it off a bush.

Ill tell himwhy, yes, Ill tell him I sold you my diamond earbobs. And I will give them toyou, too. Thatll be my collatmy whatchucallit.

I wouldnt take your earbobs.

I dont want them. I dont like them. They arent really mine, anyway.

Whose are they?

Her mind went swiftly back to the still hot noon with the country hush deep about Tara and thedead man in blue sprawled in the hall.

They were left with meby someone whos dead. Theyre mine all right. Take them. I dontwant them. Id rather have the money for them.

Good Lord! he cried impatiently. Dont you ever think of anything but money?

No, she replied frankly, turning hard green eyes upon him. And if youd been through what Ihave, you wouldnt either. Ive found out that money is the most important thing in the world and,as God is my witness, I dont ever intend to be without it again.

She remembered the hot sun, the soft red earth under her sick head, the niggery smell of thecabin behind the ruins of Twelve Oaks, remembered the refrain her heart had beaten: Ill never behungry again. Ill never be hungry again,

Im going to have money some day, lots of it, so I can have anything I want to eat. And thentherell never be any hominy or dried peas on my table. And Im going to have pretty clothes andall of them are going to be silk

All?

All, she said shortly, not even troubling to blush at his implication. Im going to have moneyenough so the Yankees can never take Tara away from me. And Im going to have a new roof for Tara and a new barn and fine mules for plowing and more cotton than you ever saw. And Wadeisnt ever going to know what it means to do without the things he needs. Never! Hes going tohave everything in the world. And all my family, they arent ever going to be hungry again. I meanit. Every word. You dont understand, youre such selfish hound. Youve never had theCarpetbaggerstryingtodriveyouout. Youveneverbeen(a) cold and ragged and had to break yourback to keep from starving!

He said quietly: I was in the Confederate Army for eight months. I dont know any better placefor starving.

The army! Bah! Youve never had to pick cotton and weed corn. Youve Dont you laugh atme!

His hands were on hers again as her voice rose harshly.

I wasnt laughing at you. I was laughing at the difference in what you look and what you reallyare. And I was remembering the first time I ever saw you, at the barbecue at the Wilkes. You hadon a green dress and little green slippers, and you were knee deep in men and quite full of yourself.

Ill wager you didnt know then how many pennies were in a dollar. There was only one idea inyour whole mind then and that was ensnaring Ash

She jerked her hands away from him.

Rhett, if we are to get on at all, youll have to stop talking about Ashley Wilkes. Well alwaysfall out about him, because you cant understand him.

I suppose you understand him like a book, said Rhett maliciously. No, Scarlett, if I am tolend you the money I reserve the right to discuss Ashley Wilkes in any terms I care to. I waive theright to collect interest on my loan but not that right. And there are a number of things about thatyoung man Id like to know.

I do not have to discuss him with you, she answered shortly.

Oh, but you do! I hold the purse strings, you see. Some day when you are rich, you can havethe power to do the same to others. ... Its obvious that you still care about him

I do not.

Oh, its so obvious from the way you rush to his defense. You

I wont stand having my friends sneered at.

Well, well let that pass for the moment. Does he still care for you or did Rock Island make himforget? Or perhaps hes learned to appreciate what a jewel of a wife he has?

At the mention of Melanie, Scarlett began to breathe hard and could scarcely restrain herselffrom crying out the whole story, that only honor kept Ashley with Melanie. She opened her mouthto speak and then closed it.

Oh. So he still hasnt enough sense to appreciate Mrs. Wilkes? And the rigors of prison didntdim his ardor for you?

I see no need to discuss the subject.

I wish to discuss it, said Rhett. There was a low note in his voice which Scarlett did notunderstand but did not like to hear. And, by God, I will discuss it and I expect you to answer me.

So hes still in love with you?

Well, what if he is? cried Scarlett, goaded. I dont care to discuss him with you because youcant understand him or his kind of love. The only kind of love you know about is justwell, thekind you carry on with creatures like that Watling woman.

Oh, said Rhett softly. So I am only capable of carnal lusts?

Well, you know its true.

Now I appreciate your hesitance in discussing the matter with me. My unclean hands and lipsbesmirch the purity of his love.

Well, yessomething like that.

Im interested in this pure love

Dont be so nasty, Rhett Butler. If you are vile enough to think theres ever been anythingwrong between us

Oh, the thought never entered my head, really. Thats why it all interests me. Just why hasntthere been anything wrong between you?

If you think that Ashley would

Ah, so its Ashley, and not you, who has fought the fight for purity. Really, Scarlett, you shouldnot give yourself away so easily.

Scarlett looked into his smooth unreadable face in confusion and indignation.

We wont go any further with this and I dont want your money. So, get out!

Oh, yes, you do want my money and, as weve gone this far, why stop? Surely there can be noharm in discussing so chaste an idyllwhen there hasnt been anything wrong. So Ashley lovesyou for your mind, your soul, your nobility of character?

Scarlett writhed at his words. Of course, Ashley loved her for just these things. It was thisknowledge that made life endurable, this knowledge that Ashley, bound by honor, loved her fromafar for beautiful things deep buried in her that he alone could see. But they did not seem sobeautiful when dragged to the light by Rhett, especially in that deceptively smooth voice thatcovered sarcasm.

It gives me back my boyish ideals to know that such a love can exist in this naughty world, hecontinued. So theres no touch of the flesh in his love for you? It would be the same if you wereugly and didnt have that white skin? And if you didnt have those green eyes which make a manwonder just what you would do if he took you in his arms? And a way of swaying your hips, thatsan allurement to any man under ninety? And those lips which arewell, I mustnt let my carnallusts obtrude. Ashley sees none of these things? Or if he sees them, they move him not at all?

Unbidden, Scarletts mind went back to that day in the orchard when Ashleys arms shook as heheld her, when his mouth was hot on hers as if he would never let her go. She went crimson at the memory and her blush was not lost on Rhett.

So, he said and there was a vibrant note almost like anger in his voice. I see. He loves you foryour mind alone.

How dare he pry with dirty fingers, making the one beautiful sacred thing in her life seem vile?

Coolly, determinedly, he was breaking down the last of her reserves and the information he wantedwas forthcoming.

Yes, he does! she cried, pushing back the memory of Ashleys lips.

My dear, he doesnt even know youve got a mind. If it was your mind that attracted him, hewould not need to struggle against you, as he must have done to keep this love soshall we sayholy? He could rest easily for, after all, a man can admire a womans mind and soul and still bean honorable gentleman and true to his wife. But it must be difficult for him to reconcile the honorof the Wilkeses with coveting your body as he does.

You judge everybodys mind by your own vile one!

Oh, Ive never denied coveting you, if thats what you mean. But, thank God, Im not botheredabout matters of honor. What I want I take if I can get it, and so I wrestle neither with angels nordevils. What a merry hell you must have made for Ashley! Almost I can be sorry for him.

II make a hell for him?

Yes, you! There you are, a constant temptation to him, but like most of his breed he preferswhat passes in these parts as honor to any amount of love. And it looks to me as if the poor devilnow had neither love nor honor to warm himself!

He has love! ... I mean, he loves me!

Does he? Then answer me this and we are through for the day and you can take the money andthrow it in the gutter for all I care.

Rhett rose to his feet and threw his half-smoked cigar into the spittoon. There was about hismovements the same pagan freedom and leashed power Scarlett had noted that night Atlanta fell,something sinister and a little frightening. If he loved you, then why in hell did he permit you tocome to Atlanta to get the tax money? Before Id let a woman I loved do that, Id

He didnt know! He had no idea that I

Doesnt it occur to you that he should have known? There was barely suppressed savagery inhis voice. Loving you as you say he does, he should have known just what you would do whenyou were desperate. He should have killed you rather than let you come up hereand to me, of allpeople! God in Heaven!

But he didnt know!

If he didnt guess it without being told, hell never know anything about you and your preciousmind.

How unfair he was! As if Ashley was a mind reader! As if Ashley could have stopped her, evenhad he known! But, she knew suddenly, Ashley could have stopped her. The faintest intimation from him, in the orchard, that some day things might be different and she would never havethought of going to Rhett. A word of tenderness, even a parting caress when she was getting on thetrain, would have held her back. But he had only talked of honor. Yetwas Rhett right? ShouldAshley have known her mind? Swiftly she put the disloyal thought from her. Of course, he didntsuspect. Ashley would never suspect that she would even think of doing anything so immoral.

Ashley was too fine to have such thoughts. Rhett was just trying to spoil her love. He was trying totear down what was most precious to her. Some day, she thought viciously, when the store was onits feet and the mill doing nicely and she had money, she would make Rhett Butler pay for themisery and humiliation he was causing her.

He was standing over her, looking down at her, faintly amused. The emotion which had stirredhim was gone.

What does it all matter to you anyway? she asked. Its my business and Ashleys and notyours.

He shrugged.

Only this. I have a deep and impersonal admiration for your endurance, Scarlett, and I do notlike to see your spirit crushed beneath too many millstones. Theres Tara. Thats a man-sized job initself. Theres your sick father added on. Hell never be any help to you. And the girls and thedarkies. And now youve taken on a husband and probably Miss Pittypat, too. Youve enoughburdens without Ashley Wilkes and his family on your hands.

Hes not on my hands. He helps

Oh, for Gods sake, he said impatiently. Dont lets have any more of that. Hes no help. Heson your hands and hell be on them, or on somebodys, till he dies. Personally, Im sick of him as atopic of conversation. ... How much money do you want?

Vituperative words rushed to her lips. After all his insults, after dragging from her those thingswhich were most precious to her and trampling on them, he still thought she would take hismoney!

But the words were checked unspoken. How wonderful it would be to scorn his offer and orderhim out of the store! But only the truly rich and the truly secure could afford this luxury. So long asshe was poor, just so long would she have to endure such scenes as this. But when she was richoh, what a beautiful warming thought that was!when she was rich, she wouldnt stand anythingshe didnt like, do without anything she desired or even be polite to people unless they pleased her.

I shall tell them all to go to Halifax, she thought, and Rhett Butler will be the first one!

The pleasure in the thought brought a sparkle into her green eyes and a half-smile to her lips.

Rhett smiled too.

Youre a pretty person, Scarlett, he said. Especially when you are meditating devilment. Andjust for the sight of that dimple Ill buy you a bakers dozen of mules if you want them.

The front door opened and the counter boy entered, picking his teeth with a quill. Scarlett rose,pulled her shawl about her and tied her bonnet strings firmly under her chin. Her mind was madeup.

Are you busy this afternoon? Can you come with me now? she asked.

Where?

I want you to drive to the mill with me. I promised Frank I wouldnt drive out of town bymyself.

To the mill in this rain?

Yes, I want to buy that mill now, before you change your mind.

He laughed so loudly the boy behind the counter started and looked at him curiously.

Have you forgotten you are married? Mrs. Kennedy cant afford to be seen driving out into thecountry with that Butler reprobate, who isnt received in the best parlors. Have you forgotten yourreputation?

Reputation, fiddle-dee-dee! I want that mill before you change your mind or Frank finds outthat Im buying it. Dont be a slow poke, Rhett. Whats a little rain? Lets hurry.

That sawmill! Frank groaned every time he thought of it, cursing himself for ever mentioning itto her. It was bad enough for her to sell her earrings to Captain Butler (of all people!) and buy themill without even consulting her own husband about it, but it was worse still that she did not turn itover to him to operate. That looked bad. As if she did not trust him or his judgment.

Frank, in common with all men he knew, felt that a wife should be guided by her husbandssuperior knowledge, should accept his opinions in full and have none of her own. He would havegiven most women their own way. Women were such funny little creatures and it never hurt tohumor their small whims. Mild and gentle by nature, it was not in him to deny a wife much. Hewould have enjoyed gratifying the foolish notions of some soft little person and scolding herlovingly for her stupidity and extravagance. But the things Scarlett set her mind on wereunthinkable.

That sawmill, for example. It was the shock of his life when she told him with a sweet smile, inanswer to his questions, that she intended to run it herself. Go into the lumber business myself,

was the way she put it. Frank would never forget the horror of that moment. Go into business forherself! It was unthinkable. There were no women in business in Atlanta. In fact, Frank had neverheard of a woman in business anywhere. If women were so unfortunate as to be compelled to makea little money to assist their families in these hard times, they made it in quiet womanly waysbaking as Mrs. Merriwether was doing, or painting china and sewing and keeping boarders, likeMrs. Elsing and Fanny, or teaching school like Mrs. Meade or giving music lessons like Mrs.

Bonnell. These ladies made money but they kept themselves at home while they did it, as a womanshould. But for a woman to leave the protection of her home and venture out into the rough worldof men, competing with them in business, rubbing shoulders with them, being exposed to insultand gossip ... Especially when she wasnt forced to do it, when she had a husband amply able toprovide for her!

Frank had hoped she was only

Chapter 37

IT WAS on a wild wet night in April that Tony Fontaine rode in from Jonesboro on a latheredhorse that was half dead from exhaustion and came knocking at their door, rousing her and Frankfrom sleep with their hearts in their throats. Then for the second time in four months, Scarlett wasmade to feel acutely what Reconstruction in an its implications meant, made to understand morecompletely what was in Wills mind when he said Our troubles have just begun, to know that thebleak words of Ashley, spoken in the wind-swept orchard of Tara, were true: This thats facing allof us is worse than warworse than prisonworse than death.

The first time she had come face to face with Reconstruction was when she teamed that JonasWilkerson with the aid of the Yankees could evict her from Tara. But Tonys advent brought it allhome to her in a far more terrifying manner. Tony came in the dark and the lashing rain and in afew minutes he was gone back into the night forever, but in the brief interval between he raised thecurtain on a scene of new horror, a curtain that she felt hopelessly would never be lowered again.

That stormy night when the knocker hammered on the door with such hurried urgency, she stoodon the landing, clutching her wrapper to her and, looking down into the hall below, had oneglimpse of Tonys swarthy saturnine face before he leaned forward and blew out the candle inFranks hand. She hurried down in the darkness to grasp his cold wet hand and hear him whisper:

Theyre after megoing to Texasmy horse is about deadand Im about starved. Ashley saidyoud Dont light the candle! Dont wake the darkies. ... I dont want to get you folks in troubleif I can help it.

With the kitchen blinds drawn and all the shades pulled down to the sills, he permitted a lightand he talked to Frank in swift jerky sentences as Scarlett hurried about, trying to scrape together ameal for him.

He was without a greatcoat and soaked to the skin. He was hatless and his black hair wasplastered to his little skin. But the merriment of the Fontaine boys, a chilling merriment that night,was in his little dancing eyes as he gulped down the whisky she brought him. Scarlett thanked Godthat Aunt Pittypat was snoring undisturbed upstairs. She would certainly swoon if she saw thisapparition.

One damned bastScalawag less, said Tony, holding out his glass for another drink. Iveridden hard and itll cost me my skin if I dont get out of here quick, but it was worth it By God,yes! Im going to try to get to Texas and lay low there. Ashley was with me in Jonesboro and hetold me to come to you all. Got to have another horse, Frank, and some money. My horse is nearlydeadall the way up here at a dead runand like a fool I went out of the house today like a batout of hell without a coat or hat or a cent of money. Not that theres much money in our house.

He laughed and applied himself hungrily to the cold corn pone and cold turnip greens on whichcongealed grease was thick in white flakes.

You can have my horse, said Frank calmly. Ive only ten dollars with me but if you can waittill morning

Hells afire, I cant wait! said Tony, emphatically but jovially. Theyre probably right behind me. I didnt get much of a start. If it hadnt been for Ashley dragging me out of there and makingme get on my horse, Id have stayed there like a fool and probably had my neck stretched by now.

Good fellow, Ashley.

So Ashley was mixed up in this frightening puzzle. Scarlett went cold, her hand at her throat.

Did the Yankees have Ashley now? Why, why didnt Frank ask what it was all about? Why did hetake it all so coolly, so much as a matter of course? She struggled to get the question to her lips.

What she began. Who

Your fathers old overseerthat damnedJonas Wilkerson.

Did youis he dead?

My God, Scarlett OHara! said Tony peevishly. When I start out to cut somebody up, youdont think Id be satisfied with scratching him with the blunt side of my knife, do you? No, byGod, I cut him to ribbons.

Good, said Frank casually. I never liked the fellow.

Scarlett looked at him. This was not the meek Frank she knew, the nervous beard clawer whoshe had learned could be bullied with such ease. There was an air about him that was crisp andcool and he was meeting the emergency with no unnecessary words. He was a man and Tony was aman and this situation of violence was mens business in which a woman had no part.

But Ashley Did he

No. He wanted to kill him but I told him it was my right, because Sally is my sister-in-law, andhe saw reason finally. He went into Jonesboro with me, in case Wilkerson got me first. But I dontthink old Ash will get in any trouble about it. I hope not. Got any jam for this corn pone? And canyou wrap me up something to take with me?

I shall scream if you dont tell me everything.

Wait till Ive gone and then scream if youve got to. Ill tell you about it while Frank saddlesthe horse. That damnedWilkerson has caused enough trouble already, know how he did youabout your taxes. Thats just one of his meannesses. But the worst thing was the way he kept thedarkies stirred up. If anybody had told me Id ever live to see the day when Id hate darkies! Damntheir black souls, they believe anything those scoundrels tell them and forget every living thingweve done for them. Now the Yankees are talking about letting the darkies vote. And they wontlet us vote. Why, theres hardly a handful of Democrats in the whole County who arent barredfrom voting, now that theyve ruled out every man who fought in the Confederate Army. And ifthey give the negroes the vote, its the end of us. Damn it, its our state! It doesnt belong to theYankees! By God, Scarlett, it isnt to be borne! And it wont be borne! Well do something about itif it means another war. Soon well be having nigger judges, nigger legislatorsblack apes out ofthe jungle

Pleasehurry, tell me! What did you do?

Give me another mite of that pone before you wrap it up. Well, the word got around thatWilkerson had gone a bit too far with his nigger-equality business. Oh, yes, he talks it to thoseblack fools by the hour. He had the gallthe Tony spluttered helplessly, to say niggers had a right totowhite women.

Oh, Tony, no!

By God, yes! I dont wonder you look sick. But hells afire, Scarlett, it cant be news to you.

Theyve been telling it to them here in Atlanta.

II didnt know.

Well, Frank would have kept it from you. Anyway, after that, we all sort of thought wed callon Mr. Wilkerson privately by night and tend to him, but before we could You remember thatblack buck, Eustis, who used to be our foreman?

Yes.

Came to the kitchen door today while Sally was fixing dinner andI dont know what he saidto her. I guess Ill never know now. But he said something and I heard her scream and I ran into thekitchen and there he was, drunk as a fiddlers bitchI beg your pardon, Scarlett, it just slippedout.

Go on.

I shot him and when Mother ran in to take care of Sally, I got my horse and started toJonesboro for Wilkerson. He was the one to blame. The damned black fool would never havethought of it but for him. And on the way past Tara, I met Ashley and, of course, he went with me.

He said to let him do it because of the way Wilkerson acted about Tara and I said No, it was myplace because Sally was my own dead brothers wife, and he went with me arguing the whole way.

And when we got to town, by God, Scarlett, do you know I hadnt even brought my pistol, Id leftit in the stable. So mad I forgot

He paused and gnawed the tough pone and Scarlett shivered. The murderous rages of theFontaines had made County history long before this chapter had opened.

So I had to take my knife to him. I found him in the barroom. I got him in a corner with Ashleyholding back the others and I told him why before I lit into him. Why, it was over before I knewit, said Tony reflecting. First thing I knew, Ashley had me on my horse and told me to come toyou folks. Ashleys a good man in a pinch. He keeps his head.

Frank came in, his greatcoat over his arm, and handed it to Tony. It was his only heavy coat butScarlett made no protest. She seemed so much on the outside of this affair, this purely masculineaffair.

But Tonythey need you at home. Surely, if you went back and explained

Frank, youve married a fool, said Tony with a grin, struggling into the coat. She thinks theYankees will reward a man for keeping niggers off his women folks. So they will, with a drumheadcourt and a rope. Give me a kiss, Scarlett. Frank wont mind and I may never see you again. Texasis a long way off. I wont dare write, so let the home folks know I got this far in safety.

She let him kiss her and the two men went out into the driving rain and stood for a moment,talking on the back porch. Then she heard a sudden splashing of hooves and Tony was gone. Sheopened the door a crack and saw Frank leading a heaving, stumbling horse into the carriage house.

She shut the door again and sat down, her knees trembling.

Now she knew what Reconstruction meant, knew as well as if the house were ringed about bynaked savages, squatting in breech clouts. Now there came rushing to her mind many things towhich she had given little thought recently, conversations she had heard but to which she had notlistened, masculine talk which had been checked half finished when she came into rooms, smallincidents in which she had seen no significance at the time, Franks futile warnings to her againstdriving out to the mill with only the feeble Uncle Peter to protect her. Now they fitted themselvestogether into one horrifying picture.

The negroes were on top and behind them were the Yankee bayonets. She could be killed, shecould be raped and, very probably, nothing would ever be done about it. And anyone who avengedher would be hanged by the Yankees, hanged without benefit of trial by judge and jury. Yankeeofficers who knew nothing of law and cared less for the circumstances of the crime could gothrough the motions of holding a trial and put a rope around a Southerners neck.

What can we do? she thought, wringing her hands in an agony of helpless fear. What can wedo with devils whod hang a nice boy like Tony just for killing a drunken buck and a scoundrellyScalawag to protect his women folks?

It isnt to be borne! Tony had cried and he was right. It couldnt be borne. But what could theydo except bear it, helpless as they were? She fell to trembling and, for the first time in her life, shepeople and events something apart from herself, saw clearly that Scarlett OHara,frigh(saw) tenedandhelpless,was(as) not all that mattered. There were thousands of women like her, allover the South, who were frightened and helpless. And thousands of men, who had laid down theirarms at Appomattox, had taken them up again and stood ready to risk their necks on a minutesnotice to protect those women.

There had been something in Tonys face which had been mirrored in Franks, an expression shehad seen recently on the faces of other men in Atlanta, a look she had noticed but had not troubledto analyze. It was an expression vastly different from the tired helplessness she had seen in thefaces of men coming home from the war after the surrender. Those men had not cared aboutanything except getting home. Now they were caring about something again, numbed nerves werecoming back to life and the old spirit was beginning to burn. They were caring again with a coldruthless bitterness. And, like Tony, they were thinking: It isnt to be borne!

She had seen Southern men, soft voiced and dangerous in the days before the war, reckless andhard in the last despairing days of the fighting. But in the faces of the two men who stared at eachother across the candle flame so short a while ago there had been something that was different,something that heartened her but frightened herfury which could find no words, determinationwhich would stop at nothing.

For the first time, she felt a kinship with the people about her, felt one with them in their fears,their bitterness, their determination. No, it wasnt to be borne! The South was too beautiful a placeto be let go without a struggle, too loved to be trampled by Yankees who hated Southerners enoughto enjoy grinding them into the dirt, too dear a homeland to be turned over to ignorant negroesdrunk with whisky and freedom.

As she thought of Tonys sudden entrance and swift exit, she felt herself akin to him, for sheremembered the old story how her father had left Ireland, left hastily and by night, after a murderwhich was no murder to him or to his family. Geralds blood was in her, violent blood. Sheremembered her hot joy in shooting the marauding Yankee. Violent blood was in them all,perilously close to the surface, lurking just beneath the kindly courteous exteriors. All of them, allthe men she knew, even the drowsy-eyed Ashley and fidgety old Frank, were like that underneathmurderous, violent if the need arose. Even Rhett, conscienceless scamp that he was, had killed anegro for being uppity to a lady.

Oh, Frank, how long will it be like this? she leaped to her feet.

As long as the Yankees hate us so, Sugar.

Is there nothing anybody can do?

Frank passed a tired hand over his wet beard. We are doing things.

What?

Why talk of them till we have accomplished something? It may take years. Perhapsperhapsthe South will always be like this.

Oh, no!

Sugar, come to bed. You must be chilled. You are shaking.

When will it all end?

When we can all vote again, Sugar. When every man who fought for the South can put a ballotin the box for a Southerner and a Democrat.

A ballot? she cried despairingly. What goods a ballot when the darkies have lost their mindswhen the Yankees have poisoned them against us?

Frank went on to explain in his patient manner, but the idea that ballots could cure the troublewas too complicated for her to follow. She was thinking gratefully that Jonas Wilkerson wouldnever again be a menace of Tara and she was thinking about Tony.

Oh, the poor Fontaines! she exclaimed. Only Alex left and so much to do at Mimosa. Whydidnt Tony have sense enough toto do it at night when no one would know who it was? A sightmore good hed do helping with the spring plowing than in Texas.

Frank put an arm about her. Usually he was gingerly when he did this, as if he anticipated beingimpatiently shaken off, but tonight there was a far-off look in his eyes and his arm was firm abouther waist.

There things more important now than plowing, Sugar. And scaring the darkies andteachingtheS(are) calawags a lesson is one of them. As long as there are fine boys like Tony left, Iguess we wont need to worry about the South too much. Come to bed.

But, Frank

If we just stand together and dont give an inch to the Yankees, well win, some day. Dont youbother your pretty head about it, Sugar. You let your men folks worry about it Maybe it wont come in our time, but surely it will come some day. The Yankees will get tired of pestering uswhen they see they cant even dent us, and then well have a decent world to live in and raise ourchildren in.

She thought of Wade and the secret she had carried silently for some days. No, she didnt wanther children raised in this welter of hate and uncertainty, of bitterness and violence lurking justbelow the surface, of poverty and grinding hardships and insecurity. She never wanted children ofhers to know what all this was like. She wanted a secure and well-ordered world in which shecould look forward and know there was a safe future ahead for them, a world where her childrenwould know only softness and warmth and good clothes and fine food.

Frank thought this could be accomplished by voting. Voting? What did votes matter? Nicepeople in the South would never have the vote again. There was only one thing in the world thatwas a certain bulwark against any calamity which fate could bring, and that was money. Shethought feverishly that they must have money, lots of it to keep them safe against disaster.

Abruptly, she told him she was going to have a baby.

For weeks after Tonys escape, Aunt Pittys house was subjected to repeated searches by partiesof Yankee soldiers. They invaded the house at all hours and without warning. They swarmedthrough the rooms, asking questions, opening closets, prodding clothes hampers, peering underbeds. The military authorities had heard that Tony had been advised to go to Miss Pittys house,and they were certain he was still hiding there or somewhere in the neighborhood.

As a result, Aunt Pitty was chronically in what Uncle Peter called a state, never knowingwhen her bedroom would be entered by an officer and a squad of men. Neither Frank nor Scarletthad mentioned Tonys brief visit, so the old lady could have revealed nothing, even had she beenso inclined. She was entirely honest in her fluttery protestations that she had seen Tony Fontaineonly once in her life and that was at Christmas time in 1862.

And, she would add breathlessly to the Yankee soldiers, in an effort to be helpful, he wasquite intoxicated at the time.

Scarlett, sick and miserable in the early stage of pregnancy, alternated between a passionatehatred of the bluecoats who invaded her privacy, frequently carrying away any little knick-knackthat appealed to them, and an equally passionate fear that Tony might prove the undoing of themall. The prisons were full of people who had been arrested for much less reason. She knew that ifone iota of the truth were proved against them, not only she and Frank but the innocent Pitty aswell would go to jail.

For some time there had been an agitation in Washington to confiscate all Rebel property topay the United States war debt and this agitation had kept Scarlett in a state of anguishedapprehension. Now, in addition to this, Atlanta was full of wild rumors about the confiscation ofproperty of offenders against military law, and Scarlett quaked lest she and Frank lose not onlytheir freedom but the house, the store and the mill. And if their property were not appropriatedbythemilitary,itwouldbeasgoodaslostifsheand(even) Frank went to jail, for whowould look after their business in their absence?

She hated Tony for bringing such trouble upon them. How could he have done such a thing tofriends? And how could Ashley have sent Tony to them? Never again would she give aid to anyoneif it meant having the Yankees come down on her like a swarm of hornets. No, she would bar thedoor against anyone needing help. Except, of course, Ashley. For weeks after Tonys brief visit shewoke from uneasy dreams at any sound in the road outside, fearing it might be Ashley trying tomake his escape, fleeing to Texas because of the aid he had given Tony. She did not know howmatters stood with him, for they did not dare write to Tara about Tonys midnight visit. Theirletters might be intercepted by the Yankees and bring trouble upon the plantation as well. But,when weeks went by and they heard no bad news, they knew that Ashley had somehow come clear.

And finally, the Yankees ceased annoying them.

But even this relief did not free Scarlett from the state of dread which began when Tony cameknocking at their door, a dread which was worse than the quaking fear of the siege shells, worseeven than the terror of Shermans men during the last days of the war. It was as if Tonysappearance that wild rainy night had stripped merciful blinders from her eyes and forced her to seethe true uncertainty of her life.

Looking about her in that cold spring of 1866, Scarlett realized what was facing her and thewhole South. She might plan and scheme, she might work harder than her slaves had ever worked,she might succeed in overcoming all of her hardships, she might through dint of determinationsolve problems for which her earlier life had provided no training at all. But for all her labor andsacrifice and resourcefulness, her small beginnings purchased at so great a cost might be snatchedaway from her at any minute. And should this happen, she had no legal rights, no legal redress,except those same drumhead courts of which Tony had spoken so bitterly, those military courtswith their arbitrary powers. Only the negroes had rights or redress these days. The Yankees had theSouth prostrate and they intended to keep it so. The South had been tilted as by a giant malicioushand, and those who had once ruled were now more helpless than their former slaves had everbeen.

Georgia heavily garrisoned with troops and Atlanta had than its share. Thecommandants of (was) the Yankee troops in the various cities had complete power, (more) even the power of lifeand death, over the civilian population, and they used that power. They could and did imprison citizensfor any cause, or no cause, seize their property, hang them. They could and did harass andhamstring them with conflicting regulations about the operation of their business, the wages theymust pay their servants, what they should say in public and private utterances and what they shouldwrite in newspapers. They regulated how, when and where they must dump their garbage and theydecided what songs the daughters and wives of ex-Confederates could sing, so that the singing ofDixie or Bonnie Blue Flag became an offense only a little less serious than treason. They ruledthat no one could get a letter out of. the post office without taking the Iron Clad oath and, in someinstances, they even prohibited the issuance of marriage licenses unless the couples had taken thehated oath.

The newspapers were so muzzled that no public protest could be raised against the injustices ordepredations of the military, and individual protests were silenced with jail sentences. The jailswere full of prominent citizens and there they stayed without hope of early trial. Trial by jury andthe law of habeas corpus were practically suspended. The civil courts still functioned after a fashion but they functioned at the pleasure of the military, who could and did interfere with theirverdicts, so that citizens so unfortunate as to get arrested were virtually at the mercy of the militaryauthorities. And so many did get arrested. The very suspicion of seditious utterances against thegovernment, suspected complicity in the Ku Klux Klan, or complaint by a negro that a white manhad been uppity to him were enough to land a citizen in jail. Proof and evidence were not needed.

The accusation was sufficient. And thanks to the incitement of the Freedmens Bureau, negroescould always be found who were willing to bring accusations.

The negroes had not yet been given the right to vote but the North was determined that theyshould vote and equally determined that their vote should be friendly to the North. With this inmind, nothing was too good for the negroes. The Yankee soldiers backed them up in anything theychose to do, and the surest way for a white person to get himself into trouble was to bring acomplaint of any kind against a negro.

The former slaves were now the lords of creation and, with the aid of the Yankees, the lowestand most ignorant ones were on top. The better class of them, scorning freedom, were suffering asseverely as their white masters. Thousands of house servants, the highest caste in the slavepopulation, remained with their white folks, doing manual labor which had been beneath them inthe old days. Many loyal field hands also refused to avail themselves of the new freedom, but thehordes of trashy free issue niggers, who were causing most of the trouble, were drawn largelyfrom the field-hand class.

In slave days, these lowly blacks had been despised by the house negroes and yard negroes ascreatures of small worth. Just as Ellen had done, other plantation mistresses throughout the Southhad put the pickaninnies through courses of training and elimination to select the best of them forthe positions of greater responsibility. Those consigned to the fields were the ones least willing orable to learn, the least energetic, the least honest and trustworthy, the most vicious and brutish. Andnow this class, the lowest in the black social order, was making life a misery for the South.

Aided by the unscrupulous adventurers who operated the Freedmens Bureau and urged on by afervor of Northern hatred almost religious in its fanaticism, the former field hands foundthemselves suddenly elevated to the seats of the mighty. There they conducted themselves ascreatures of small intelligence might naturally be expected to do. Like monkeys or small childrenturned loose among treasured objects whose value is beyond their comprehension, they ran wildeither from perverse pleasure in destruction or simply because of their ignorance.

To the credit of the negroes, including the least intelligent of them, few were actuated by maliceand those few had usually been mean niggers even in slave days. But they were, as a class,childlike in mentality, easily led and from long habit accustomed to taking orders. Formerly theirwhite masters had given the orders. Now they had a new set of masters, the Bureau and theCarpetbaggers, and their orders were: Youre just as good as any white man, so act that way. Justas soon as you can vote the Republican ticket, you are going to have the white mans property. Itsas good as yours now. Take it, if you can get it!

Dazzled by these tales, freedom became a never-ending picnic, a barbecue every day of theweek, a carnival of idleness and theft and insolence. Country negroes flocked into the cities,leaving the rural districts without labor to make the crops. Atlanta was crowded with them and still they came by the hundreds, lazy and dangerous as a result of the new doctrines being taught them.

Packed into squalid cabins, smallpox, typhoid and tuberculosis broke out among them.

Accustomed to the care of their mistresses when they were ill in slave days, they did not know howto nurse themselves or their sick. Relying upon their masters in the old days to care for their agedand their babies, they now had no sense of responsibility for their helpless. And the Bureau was fartoo interested in political matters to provide the care the plantation owners had once given.

Abandoned negro children ran like frightened animals about the town until kind-hearted whitepeople took them into their kitchens to raise. Aged country darkies, deserted by their children,bewildered and panic stricken in the bustling town, sat on the curbs and cried to the ladies whopassed: Mistis, please Mam, write mah old Marster down in Fayette County dat Ahs up hyah.

Hell come tek dis ole nigger home agin. Fo Gawd, Ah done got nuff of dis freedom!

The Freedmens Bureau, overwhelmed by the numbers who poured in upon them, realized toolate a part of the mistake and tried to send them back to their former owners. They told the negroesthat if they would go back, they would go as free workers, protected by written contractsspecifying wages by the day. The old darkies went back to the plantations gladly, making a heavierburden than ever on the poverty-stricken planters who had not the heart to turn them out, but theyoung ones remained in Atlanta. They did not want to be workers of any kind, anywhere. Whywork when the belly is full?

For the first time in their lives the negroes were able to get all the whisky they might want. Inslave days, it was something they never tasted except at Christmas, when each one received adrap along with his gift. Now they had not only the Bureau agitators and the Carpetbaggersurging them on, but the incitement of whisky as well, and outrages were inevitable. Neither life norproperty was safe from them and the white people, unprotected by law, were terrorized. Men wereinsulted on the streets by drunken blacks, houses and barns were burned at night, horses and cattleand chickens stolen in broad daylight, crimes of all varieties were committed and few of the perpetratorswere brought to justice.

But these ignominies and dangers were as nothing compared with the peril of white women,many bereft by the war of male protection, who lived alone in the outlying districts and on lonelyroads. It was the large number of outrages on women and the ever-present fear for the safety oftheir wives and daughters that drove Southern men to cold and trembling fury and caused the KuKlux Klan to spring up overnight. And it was against this nocturnal organization that thenewspapers of the North cried out most loudly, never realizing the tragic necessity that brought itinto being. The North wanted every member of the Ku Klux hunted down and hanged, becausethey had dared take the punishment of crime into their own hands at a time when the ordinaryprocesses of law and order had been overthrown by the invaders.

Here was the astonishing spectacle of half a nation attempting, at the point of bayonet, to forceupon the other half the rule of negroes, many of them scarcely one generation out of the Africanjungles. The vote must be given to them but it must be denied to most of their former owners. TheSouth must be kept down and disfranchisement of the whites was one way to keep the South down.

Most of those who had fought for the Confederacy, held office under it or given aid and comfort toit were not allowed to vote, had no choice in the selection of their public officials and were whollyunder the power of an alien rule. Many men, thinking soberly of General Lees words and example, wished to take the oath, become citizens again and forget the past. But they were notpermitted to take it. Others who were permitted to take the oath, hotly refused to do so, scorning toswear allegiance to a government which was deliberately subjecting them to cruelty andhumiliation.

Scarlett heard over and over until she could have screamed at the repetition: Id have takentheir damned oath right after the surrender if theyd acted decent I can be restored to the Union, butby God, I cant be reconstructed into it!

Through these anxious days and nights, Scarlett was torn with fear. The ever-present menace oflawless negroes and Yankee soldiers preyed on her mind, the danger of confiscation was constantlywith her, in her dreams, and she dreaded worse terrors to come. Depressed by thehelplessnessof(even) herself and her friends, of the whole South, it was not strange that she oftenremembered during these days the words which Tony Fontaine had spoken so passionately:

God God, Scarlett, it isnt to be borne! And it wont be borne!

In spite of war, fire and Reconstruction, Atlanta had again become a boom town. In many ways,the place resembled the busy young city of the Confederacys early days. The only trouble was thatthe soldiers crowding the streets wore the wrong kind of uniforms, the money was in the hands ofthe wrong people, and the negroes were living in leisure while their former masters struggled andstarved.

Underneath the surface were misery and fear, but all the outward appearances were those of athriving town that was rapidly rebuilding from its ruins, a bustling, hurrying town. Atlanta, itseemed, must always be hurrying, no matter what its circumstances might be. Savannah,Charleston, Augusta, Richmond, New Orleans would never hurry. It was ill bred and Yankeefied tohurry. But in this period, Atlanta was more ill bred and Yankeefied than it had ever been before orwould ever be again. With new people thronging in from all directions, the streets were chokedand noisy from morning till night. The shiny carriages of Yankee officers wives and newly richCarpetbaggers splashed mud on the dilapidated buggies of the townspeople, and gaudy new homesof wealthy strangers crowded in among the sedate dwellings of older citizens.

The war had definitely established the importance of Atlanta in the affairs of the South and thehitherto obscure town was now known far and wide. The railroads for which Sherman had foughtan entire summer and killed thousands of men were again stimulating the life of the city they hadbrought into being. Atlanta was again the center of activities for a wide region, as it had beenbefore its destruction, and the town was receiving a great influx of new citizens, both welcome andunwelcome.

Invading Carpetbaggers made Atlanta their headquarters and on the streets they jostled againstrepresentatives of the oldest families in the South who were likewise newcomers in the town.

Families from the country districts who had been burned out during Shermans march and whocould no longer make a living without the slaves to till the cotton had come to Atlanta to live. Newsettlers were coming in every day from Tennessee and the Carolinas where the hand ofReconstruction lay even heavier than in Georgia. Many Irish and Germans who had been bounty men in the Union Army had settled in Atlanta after their discharge. The wives and families of theYankee garrison, filled with curiosity about the South after four years of war, came to swell thepopulation. Adventurers of every kind swarmed in, hoping to make their fortunes, and the negroesfrom the country continued to come by the hundreds.

The town was roaringwide open like a frontier village, making no effort to cover its vices andsins. Saloons blossomed overnight, two and sometimes three in a block, and after nightfall thestreets were full of drunken men, black and white, reeling from wall to curb and back again.

Thugs, pickpockets and prostitutes lurked in the unlit alleys and shadowy streets. Gambling housesran full blast and hardly a night passed without its shooting or cutting affray. Respectable citizenswere scandalized to find that Atlanta had a large and thriving red-light district, larger and morethriving than during the war. All night long pianos jangled from behind drawn shades and rowdysongs and laughter floated out, punctuated by occasional screams and pistol shots. The inmates ofthese houses were bolder than the prostitutes of the war days and brazenly hung out of theirwindows and called to passers-by. And on Sunday afternoons, the handsome closed carriages ofthe madams of the district rolled down the main streets, filled with girls in their best finery, takingthe air from behind lowered silk shades.

Belle Watling was the most notorious of the madams. She had opened a new house of her own, alarge two-story building that made neighboring houses in the district look like shabby rabbitwarrens. There was a long barroom downstairs, elegantly hung with oil paintings, and a negroorchestra played every night. The upstairs, so rumor said, was fitted out with the finest of plushupholstered furniture, heavy lace curtains and imported mirrors in gilt frames. The dozen youngladies with whom the house was furnished were comely, if brightly painted, and comportedthemselves more quietly than those of other houses. At least, the police were seldom summoned toBelles.

This house was something that the matrons of Atlanta whispered about furtively and ministerspreached against in guarded terms as a cesspool of iniquity, a hissing and a reproach. Everyoneknew that a woman of Belles type couldnt have made enough money by herself to set up such aluxurious establishment. She had to have a backer and a rich one at that. And Rhett Butler hadnever had the decency to conceal his relations with her, so it was obvious that he and no other mustbe that backer. Belle herself presented a prosperous appearance when glimpsed occasionally in herclosed carriage driven by an impudent yellow negro. When she drove by, behind a fine pair ofbays, all the little boys along the street who could evade their mothers ran to peer at her andwhisper excitedly: Thats her! Thats ole Belle! I seen her red hair!

Shouldering the shell-pitted houses patched with bits of old lumber and smoke-blackened bricks,the fine homes of the Carpetbaggers and war profiteers were rising, with mansard roofs, gables andturrets, stained-glass windows and wide lawns. Night after night, in these newly built homes, thewindows were ablaze with gas light and the sound of music and dancing feet drifted out upon theair. Women in stiff bright-colored silks strolled about long verandas, squired by men in eveningclothes. Champagne corks popped, and on lace tablecloths seven-course dinners were laid. Hamsin wine, pressed duck, pat de foie gras, rare fruits in and out of season, were spread in profusion.

Behind the shabby doors of the old houses, poverty and hunger livedall the more bitter for thebrave gentility with which they were borne, all the more pinching for the outward show of proud indifference to material wants. Dr. Meade could tell unlovely stories of those families who hadbeen driven from mansions to boarding houses and from boarding houses to dingy rooms on backstreets. He had too many lady patients who were suffering from weak hearts and declines. Heknew, and they knew he knew, that slow starvation was the trouble. He could tell of consumptionmaking inroads on entire families and of pellagra, once found only among poor whites, which wasnow appearing in Atlantas best families. And there were babies with thin rickety legs and motherswho could not nurse them. Once the old doctor had been wont to thank God reverently for eachchild he brought into the world. Now he did not think life was such a boon. It was a hard world forlittle babies and so many died in their first few months of life.

Bright lights and wine, fiddles and dancing, brocade and broadcloth in the showy big housesand, just around the corners, slow starvation and cold. Arrogance and callousness for theconquerors, bitter endurance and hatred for the conquered.

Chapter 38

SCARLETT SAW IT ALL, lived with it by day, took it to bed with her at night, dreading alwayswhat might happen next. She knew that she and Frank were already in the Yankees black books,because of Tony, and disaster might descend on them at any hour. But, now of all times, she couldnot afford to be pushed back to her beginningsnot now with a baby coming, the mill justcommencing to pay and Tara depending on her for money until the cotton came in in the fall. Oh,suppose she should lose everything! Suppose she should have to start all over again with only herpuny weapons against this mad world! To have to pit her red lips and green eyes and her shrewdshallow brain against the Yankees and everything the Yankees stood for. Weary with dread, she feltthat she would rather kill herself than try to make a new beginning.

In the ruin and chaos of that spring of 1866, she single mindedly turned her energies to makingthe mill pay. There was money in Atlanta. The wave of rebuilding was giving her the opportunityshe wanted and she knew she could make money if only she could stay out of jail. But, she toldherself time and again, she would have to walk easily, gingerly, be meek under insults, yielding toinjustices, never giving offense to anyone, black or white, who might do her harm. She hated theimpudent free negroes as much as anyone and her flesh crawled with fury every time she heardtheir insulting remarks and high-pitched laughter as she went by. But she never even gave them aglance of contempt. She hated the Carpetbaggers and Scalawags who were getting rich with easewhile she struggled, but she said nothing in condemnation of them. No one in Atlanta could haveloathed the Yankees more than she, for the very sight of a blue uniform made her sick with rage,but even in the privacy of her family she kept silent about them.

I wont be a big-mouthed fool, she thought grimly. Let others break their hearts over the olddays and the men wholl never come back. Let others burn with fury over the Yankee rule andlosing the ballot. Let others go to jail for speaking their minds and get themselves hanged for beingin the Ku Klux Klan. (Oh, what a dreaded name that was, almost as terrifying to Scarlett as to thenegroes.) Let other women be proud that their husbands belonged. Thank God, Frank had neverbeen mixed up in it! Let others stew and fume and plot and plan about things they could not help.

What did the past matter compared with the tense present and the dubious future? What did the ballot matter when bread, a roof and staying out of jail were the real problems? And, please God,just let me stay out of trouble until June!

Only till June! By that month Scarlett knew she would be forced to retire into Aunt Pittys houseand remain secluded there until after her child was born. Already people were criticizing her forappearing in public when she was in such a condition. No lady ever showed herself when she waspregnant. Already Frank and Pitty were begging her not to expose herselfand themtoembarrassment and she had promised them to stop work in June.

Only till June! By June she must have the mill well enough established for her to leave it. ByJune she must have money enough to give her at least some little protection against misfortune. Somuch to do and so little time to do it! She wished for more hours of the day and counted theminutes, as she strained forward feverishly in her pursuit of money and still more money.

Because she nagged the timid Frank, the store was doing better now and he was even collectingsome of the old bills. But it was the sawmill on which her hopes were pinned. Atlanta these dayswas like a giant plant which had been cut to the ground but now was springing up again withsturdier shoots, thicker foliage, more numerous branches. The demand for building materials wasfar greater than could be supplied. Prices of lumber, brick and stone soared and Scarlett kept themill running from dawn until lantern light.

A part of every day she spent at the mill, prying into everything, doing her best to check thethievery she felt sure was going on. But most of the time she was riding about the town, makingthe rounds of builders, contractors and carpenters, even calling on strangers she had heard mightbuild at future dates, cajoling them into promises of buying from her and her only.

Soon she was a familiar sight on Atlantas streets, sitting in her buggy beside the dignified,disapproving old darky driver, a lap robe pulled high about her, her little mittened hands clasped inher lap. Aunt Pitty had made her a pretty green mantelet which hid her figure and a green pancakehat which matched her eyes, and she always wore these becoming garments on her business calls.

A faint dab of rouge on her cheeks and a fainter fragrance of cologne made her a charming picture,as long as she did not alight from the buggy and show her figure. And there was seldom any needfor this, for she smiled and beckoned and the men came quickly to the buggy and frequently stoodbareheaded in the rain to talk business with her.

She was not the only one who had seen the opportunities for making money out of lumber, butshe did not fear her competitors. She knew with conscious pride in her own smartness that she wasthe equal of any of them. She was Geralds own daughter and the shrewd trading instinct she hadinherited was now sharpened by her needs.

At first the other dealers had laughed at her, laughed with good-natured contempt at the veryidea of a woman in business. But now they did not laugh. They swore silently as they saw her rideby. The fact that she was a woman frequently worked in her favor, for she could upon occasionlook so helpless and appealing that she melted hearts. With no difficulty whatever she couldmutely convey the impression of a brave but timid lady, forced by brutal circumstance into adistasteful position, a helpless little lady who would probably starve if customers didnt buy herlumber. But when ladylike airs failed to get results she was coldly businesslike and willinglyundersold her competitors at a loss to herself if it would bring her a new customer. She was not above selling a poor grade of lumber for the price of good lumber if she thought she would not bedetected, and she had no scruples about blackguarding the other lumber dealers. With everyappearance of reluctance at disclosing the unpleasant truth, she would sigh and tell prospectivecustomers that her competitors lumber was far too high in price, rotten, full of knot holes and ingeneral of deplorably poor quality.

The first time Scarlett lied in this fashion she felt disconcerted and guiltydisconcerted becausethe lie sprang so easily and naturally to her lips, guilty because the thought flashed into her mind:

What would Mother say?

There was no doubt what Ellen would say to a daughter who told lies and engaged in sharppractices. She would be stunned and incredulous and would speak gentle words that stung despitetheir gentleness, would talk of honor and honesty and truth and duty to ones neighbor. Momentarily,Scarlett cringed as she pictured the look on her mothers face. And then the picturefaded, blotted out by an impulse, hard, unscrupulous and greedy, which had been born in the leandays at Tara and was now strengthened by the present uncertainty of life. So she passed thismilestone as she had passed others before itwith a sigh that she was not as Ellen would like herto be, a shrug and the repetition of her unfailing charm: Ill think of all this later.

But she never again thought of Ellen in connection with her business practices, never againregretted any means she used to take trade away from other lumber dealers. She knew she wasperfectly safe in lying about them. Southern chivalry protected her. A Southern lady could lie abouta gentleman but a Southern gentleman could not lie about a lady or, worse still, call the lady a liar.

Other lumbermen could only fume inwardly and state heatedly, in the bosoms of their families, thatthey wished to God Mrs. Kennedy was a man for just about five minutes.

One poor white who operated a mill on the Decatur road did try to fight Scarlett with her ownweapons, saying openly that she was a liar and a swindler. But it hurt him rather than helped, foreveryone was appalled that even a poor white should say such shocking things about a lady ofgood family, even when the lady was conducting herself in such an unwomanly way. Scarlett borehis remarks with silent dignity and, as time went by, she turned all her attention to him and hiscustomers. She undersold him so relentlessly and delivered, with secret groans, such an excellentquality of lumber to prove her probity that he was soon bankrupt. Then, to Franks horror, shetriumphantly bought his mill at her own price.

Once in her possession there arose the perplexing problem of finding a trustworthy man to put incharge of it. She did not want another man like Mr. Johnson. She knew that despite all herwatchfulness he was still selling her lumber behind her back, but she thought it would be easy tofind the right sort of man. Wasnt everybody as poor as Jobs turkey, and werent the streets full ofmen, some of them formerly rich, who were without work? The day never went by that Frank didnot give money to some hungry ex-soldier or that Pitty and Cookie did not wrap up food for gauntbeggars.

But Scarlett, for some reason she could not understand, did not want any of these. I dont wantmen who havent found something to do after a year, she thought. If they havent adjusted topeace yet, they couldnt adjust to me. And they all look so hangdog and licked. I dont want a manwhos licked. I want somebody whos smart and energetic like Renny or Tommy Wellburn or Kells Whiting or one of the Simmons boys oror any of that tribe. They havent got that I-dont-careabout-anything look the soldiers had right after the surrender. They look like they cared a heapabout a heap of things.

But to her surprise the Simmons boys, who had started a brick kiln, and Kells Whiting, who wasselling a preparation made up in his mothers kitchen, that was guaranteed to straighten the lankiestnegro hair in six applications, smiled politely, thanked her and refused. It was the same with thedozen others she approached. In desperation she raised the wage she was offering but she was stillrefused. One of Mrs. Merriwethers nephews observed impertinently that while he didntespecially enjoy driving a dray, it was his own dray and he would rather get somewhere under hisown steam than Scarletts.

One afternoon, Scarlett pulled up her buggy beside Ren Picards pie wagon and hailed Renand the crippled Tommy Wellburn, who was catching a ride home with his friend.

Look here, Renny, why dont you come and work for me? Managing a mill is a sight morerespectable than driving a pie wagon. Id think, youd be ashamed.

Me, I am dead to shame, grinned Ren. Who would be respectable? All of my days I wasrespectable until ze war set me free lak ze darkies. Nevaire again must I be deegneefied and full ofennui. Free lak ze bird! I lak my pie wagon. I lak my mule. I lak ze dear Yankees who so kindlybuy ze pie of Madame Belle Mre. No, my Scarlett, I must be ze King of ze Pies. Eet ees my destiny!

Lak Napoleon, I follow my star. He flourished his whip dramatically.

But you werent raised to sell pies any more than Tommy was raised to wrastle with a bunch ofwild Irish masons. My kind of work is more

And I suppose you were raised to run a lumber mill, said Tommy, the corners of his mouthtwitching. Yes, I can just see little Scarlett at her mothers knee, lisping her lesson, Never sellgood lumber if you can get a better price for bad.

Ren roared at this, his small monkey eyes dancing with glee as he whacked Tommy on histwisted back.

Dont be impudent, said Scarlett coldly, for she saw little humor in Tommys remark. Ofcourse, I wasnt raised to run a sawmill.

I didnt mean to be impudent. But you are running a sawmill, whether you were raised to it ornot. And running it very well, too. Well, none of us, as far as I can see, are doing what we intendedto do right now, but I think well make out just the same. Its a poor person and a poor nation thatsits down and cries because life isnt precisely what they expected it to be. Why dont you pick upsome enterprising Carpetbagger to work for you, Scarlett? The woods are full of them, Godknows.

I dont want a Carpetbagger. Carpetbaggers will steal anything that isnt red hot or naileddown. If they amounted to anything theyd have stayed where they were, instead of coming downhere to pick our bones. I want a nice man, from nice folks, who is smart and honest and energeticand

You dont want much. And you wont get it for the wage youre offering. All the men of that description, barring the badly maimed ones, have already got something to do. They may be roundpegs in square holes but theyve all got something to do. Something of their own that theyd ratherdo than work for a woman.

Men havent got much sense, have they, when you get down to rock bottom?

Maybe not but theyve got a heap of pride, said Tommy soberly.

Pride! Pride tastes awfully good, especially when the crust is flaky and you put meringue onit, said Scarlett tartly.

The two men laughed, a bit unwillingly, and it seemed to Scarlett that they drew together inunited masculine disapproval of her. What Tommy said was true, she thought, running over in hermind the men she had approached and the ones she intended to approach. They were all busy, busyat something, working hard, working harder than they would have dreamed possible in the daysbefore the war. They werent doing what they wanted to do perhaps, or what was easiest to do, orwhat they had been reared to do, but they were doing something. Times were too hard for men tobe choosy. And if they were sorrowing for lost hopes, longing for lost ways of living, no one knewit but they. They were fighting a new war, a harder war than the one before. And they were caringabout life again, caring with the same urgency and the same violence that animated them beforethe war had cut their lives in two.

Scarlett, said Tommy awkwardly, I do hate to ask a favor of you, after being impudent toyou, but Im going to ask it just the same. Maybe it would help you anyway. My brother-in-law,Hugh Elsing, isnt doing any too well peddling kindling wood. Everybody except the Yankees goesout and collects his own kindling wood. And I know things are mighty hard with the whole Elsingfamily. II do what I can, but you see Ive got Fanny to support, and then, too, Ive got mymother and two widowed sisters down in Sparta to look after. Hugh is nice, and you wanted a niceman, and hes from nice folks, as you know, and hes honest.

Butwell, Hugh hasnt got much gumption or else hed make a success of his kindling.

Tommy shrugged.

Youve got a hard way of looking at things, Scarlett, he said. But you think Hugh over. Youcould go far and do worse. I think his honesty and his willingness will outweigh his lack ofgumption.

Scarlett did not answer, for she did not want to be too rude. But to her mind there were few, ifany, qualities that out-weighed gumption.

After she had unsuccessfully canvassed the town and refused the importuning of many eagerCarpetbaggers, she finally decided to take Tommys suggestion and ask Hugh Elsing. He had beena dashing and resourceful officer during the war, but two severe wounds and four years of fightingseemed to have drained him of all his resourcefulness, leaving him to face the rigors of peace asbewildered as a child. There was a lost-dog look in his eyes these days as he went about peddlinghis firewood, and he was not at all the kind of man she had hoped to get.

Hes stupid, she thought. He doesnt know a thing about business and Ill bet he cant addtwo and two. And I doubt if hell ever learn. But, at least, hes honest and wont swindle me.

Scarlett had little use these days for honesty in herself, but the less she valued it in herself themore she was beginning to value it in others.

Its a pity Johnnie Gallegher is tied up with Tommy Wellburn on that construction work, shethought. Hes just the kind of man I want Hes hard as nails and slick as a snake, but hed behonest if it paid him to be honest I understand him and he understands me and we could dobusiness together very well. Maybe I can get him when the hotel is finished and till then Ill haveto make out on Hugh and Mr. Johnson. If I put Hugh in charge of the new mill and leave Mr.

Johnson at the old one, I can stay in town and see to the selling while they handle the milling andhauling. Until I can get Johnnie Ill have to risk Mr. Johnson robbing me if I stay in town all thetime. If only he wasnt a thief! I believe Ill build a lumber yard on half that lot Charles left me. Ifonly Frank didnt holler so loud about me building a saloon on the other half! Well, I shall buildthe saloon just as soon as I get enough money ahead, no matter how he takes on. If only Frankwasnt so thin skinned. Oh, God, if only I wasnt going to have a baby at this of all times! In a littlewhile Ill be so big I cant go out. Oh, God, if only I wasnt going to have a baby! And oh, God, ifthe damned Yankees will only let me alone! If

If! If! If! There were so many ifs in life, never any certainty of anything, never any sense ofsecurity, always the dread of losing everything and being cold and hungry again. Of course, Frankwas making a little more money now, but Frank was always ailing with colds and frequently forcedto stay in bed for days. Suppose he should become an invalid. No, she could not afford to count onFrank for much. She must not count on anything or anybody but herself. And what she could earnseemed so pitiably small. Oh, what would she do if the Yankees came and took it all away fromher? If! If! If!

Half of what she made every month went to Will at Tara, part to Rhett to repay his loan and therest she hoarded. No miser ever counted his gold oftener than she and no miser ever had greaterfear of losing it. She would not put the money in the bank, for it might fail or the Yankees mightconfiscate it. So she carried what she could with her, tucked into her corset, and hid small wads ofbills about the house, under loose bricks on the hearth, in her scrap bag, between the pages of theBible. And her temper grew shorter and shorter as the weeks went by, for every dollar she savedwould be just one more dollar to lose if disaster descended.

Frank, Pitty and the servants bore her outbursts with maddening kindness, attributing her baddisposition to her pregnancy, never realizing the true cause. Frank knew that pregnant women mustbe humored, so he put his pride in his pocket and said nothing more about her running the millsand her going about town at such a time, as no lady should do. Her conduct was a constantembarrassment to him but he reckoned he could endure it for a while longer. After the baby came,he knew she would be the same sweet feminine girl he had courted. But in spite of everything hedid to appease her, she continued to have her tantrums and often he thought she acted like onepossessed.

No one seemed to realize what really possessed her, what drove her like a mad woman. It was apassion to get her affairs in order before she had to retire behind doors, to have as much money aspossible in case the deluge broke upon her again, to have a stout levee of cash against the risingtide of Yankee hate. Money was the obsession dominating her mind these days. When she thoughtof the baby at all, it was with baffled rage at the untimeliness of it.

Death and taxes and childbirth! Theres never any convenient time for any of them!

Atlanta had been scandalized enough when Scarlett, a woman, began operating the sawmill butas time went by, the town decided there was no limit to what she would do. Her sharp trading wasshocking, especially when her poor mother had been a Robillard, and it was positively indecent theway she kept on going about the streets when everyone knew she was pregnant. No respectablewhite woman and few negroes ever went outside their homes from the moment they first suspectedthey were with child, and Mrs. Merriwether declared indignantly that from the way Scarlett wasacting she was likely to have the baby on the public streets.

But all the previous criticism of her conduct was as nothing compared with the buzz of gossipthat now went through the town. Scarlett was not only trafficking with the Yankees but was givingevery appearance of really liking it!

Mrs. Merriwether and many other Southerners were also doing business with the newcomersfrom the North, but the difference was that they did not like it and plainly showed they did not likeit. And Scarlett did, or seemed to, which was just as bad. She had actually taken tea with theYankee officers wives in their homes! In fact, she had done practically everything short of invitingthem into her own home, and the town guessed she would do even that, except for Aunt Pitty andFrank.

Scarlett knew the town was talking but she did not care, could not afford to care. She still hatedthe Yankees with as fierce a hate as on the day when they tried to burn Tara, but she coulddissemble that hate. She knew that if she was going to make money, she would have to make it outof the Yankees, and she had learned that buttering them up with smiles and kind words was thesurest way to get their business for her mill.

Some day when she was very rich and her money was hidden away where the Yankees could notfind it, then, then she would tell them exactly what she thought of them, tell them how she hatedand loathed and despised them. And what a joy that would be! But until that time came, it was justplain common sense to get along with them. And if that was hypocrisy, let Atlanta make the mostof it.

She discovered that making friends with the Yankee officers was as easy as shooting birds on theground. They were lonely exiles in a hostile land and many of them were starved for politefeminine associations in a town where respectable women drew their skirts aside in passing andlooked as if they would like to spit on them. Only the prostitutes and the negro women had kindwords for them. But Scarlett was obviously a lady and a lady of family, for all that she worked, andthey thrilled to her flashing smile and the pleasant light in her green eyes.

Frequently when Scarlett sat in her buggy talking to them and making her dimples play, herdislike for them rose so strong that it was hard not to curse them to their faces. But she restrainedherself and she found that twisting Yankee men around her finger was no more difficult than thatsame diversion had been with Southern men. Only this was no diversion but a grim business. Therole she enacted was that of a refined sweet Southern lady in distress. With an air of dignifiedreserve she was able to keep her victims at their proper distance, but there was nevertheless a graciousness in her manner which left a certain warmth in the Yankee officers memories of Mrs.

Kennedy.

This warmth was very profitableas Scarlett had intended it to be. Many of the officers of thegarrison, not knowing how long they would be stationed in Atlanta, had sent for their wives andfamilies. As the hotels and boarding houses were overflowing, they were building small houses;and they were glad to buy their lumber from the gracious Mrs. Kennedy, who treated them morepolitely than anyone else in town. The Carpetbaggers and Scalawags also, who were building finehomes and stores and hotels with their new wealth, found it more pleasant to do business with herthan with the former Confederate soldiers who were courteous but with a courtesy more formaland cold than outspoken hate.

So, because she was pretty and charming and could appear quite helpless and forlorn at times,they gladly patronized her lumber yard and also Franks store, feeling that they should help aplucky little woman who apparently had only a shiftless husband to support her. And Scarlett,watching the business grow, felt that she was safeguarding not only the present with Yankee moneybut the future with Yankee friends.

Keeping her relations with the Yankee officers on the plane she desired was easier man sheexpected, for they all seemed to be in awe of Southern ladies, but Scarlett soon found that theirwives presented a problem she had not anticipated. Contacts with the Yankee women were not ofher seeking. She would have been glad to avoid them but she could not, for the officers wiveswere determined to meet her. They had an avid curiosity about the South and Southern women,and Scarlett gave them their first opportunity to satisfy it. Other Atlanta women would havenothing to do with them and even refused to bow to them in church, so when business broughtScarlett to their homes, she was like an answer to prayer. Often when Scarlett sat in her buggy infront of a Yankee home talking of uprights and shingles with the man of the house, the wife cameout to join in the conversation or insist that she come inside for a cup of tea. Scarlett seldomrefused, no matter how distasteful the idea might be, for she always hoped to have an opportunityto suggest tactfully that they do their trading at Franks store. But her self-control was severelytested many times, because of the personal questions they asked and because of the smug andcondescending attitude they displayed toward all things Southern.

Accepting Uncle Toms Cabin as revelation second only to the Bible, the Yankee women allwanted to know about the bloodhounds which every Southerner kept to track down runawayslaves. And they never believed her when she told them she had only seen one bloodhound in allher life and it was a small mild dog and not a huge ferocious mastiff. They wanted to know aboutthe dreadful branding irons which planters used to mark the faces of their slaves and the cat-onine-tails with which they beat them to death, and they evidenced what Scarlett felt was a verynasty and ill-bred interest in slave concubinage. Especially did she resent this in view of theenormous increase in mulatto babies in Atlanta since the Yankee soldiers had settled in the town.

Any other Atlanta woman would have expired in rage at having to listen to such bigotedignorance but Scarlett managed to control herself. Assisting her in this was the fact that theyaroused her contempt more than her anger. After all, they were Yankees and no one expected anythingbetter from Yankees. So their unthinking insults to her state, her people and their morals,glanced off and never struck deep enough to cause her more than a well-concealed sneer until an incident occurred which made her sick with rage and showed her, if she needed any showing, howwide was the gap between North and South and how utterly impossible it was to bridge it.

While driving home with Uncle Peter one afternoon, she passed the house into which werecrowded the families of three officers who were building their own homes with Scarletts lumber.

The three wives were standing in the walk as she drove by and they waved to her to stop. Comingout to the carriage block they greeted her in accents that always made her feel that one couldforgive Yankees almost anything except their voices.

You are just the person I want to see, Mrs. Kennedy, said a tall thin woman from Maine. Iwant to get some information about this benighted town.

Scarlett swallowed the insult to Atlanta with the contempt it deserved and smiled her best.

And what can I tell you?

My nurse, my Bridget, has gone back North. She said she wouldnt stay another day down hereamong the nay-gurs as she calls them. And the children are just driving me distracted! Do tell mehow to go about getting another nurse. I do not know where to apply.

That shouldnt be difficult, said Scarlett and laughed. If you can find a darky just in from thecountry who hasnt been spoiled by the Freedmens Bureau, youll have the best kind of servantpossible. Just stand at your gate here and ask every darky woman who passes and Im sure

The three women broke into indignant outcries.

Do you think Id trust my babies to a black nigger? cried the Maine woman. I want a goodIrish girl.

Im afraid youll find no Irish servants in Atlanta, answered Scarlett, coolness in her voice.

Personally, Ive never seen a white servant and I shouldnt care to have one in my house. And,

she could not keep a slight note of sarcasm from her words, I assure you that darkies arentcannibals and are quite trustworthy.

Goodness, no! I wouldnt have one in my house. The idea!

I wouldnt trust them any farther than I could see them and as for letting them handle mybabies ...

Scarlett thought of the kind, gnarled hands of Mammy worn rough in Ellens service and hersand Wades. What did these strangers know of black hands, how dear and comforting they couldbe, how unerringly they knew how to soothe, to pat, to fondle? She laughed shortly.

Its strange you should feel that way when it was you all who freed them.

Lor! Not I, dearie, laughed the Maine woman. I never saw a nigger till I came South lastmonth and I dont care if I never see another. They give me the creeps. I wouldnt trust one ofthem. ...

For some moments Scarlett had been conscious that Uncle Peter was breathing hard and sittingup very straight as he stared steadily at the horses ears. Her attention was called to him moreforcibly when the Maine woman broke off suddenly with a laugh and pointed him out to hercompanions.

Look at that old nigger swell up like a toad, she giggled. Ill bet hes an old pet of yours, isnthe? You Southerners dont know how to treat niggers. You spoil them to death.

Peter sucked in his breath and his wrinkled brow showed deep furrows but he kept his eyesstraight ahead. He had never had the term nigger applied to him by a white person in all his life.

By other negroes, yes. But never by a white person. And to be called untrustworthy and an oldpet, he, Peter, who had been the dignified mainstay of the Hamilton family for years!

Scarlett felt, rather than saw, the black chin begin to shake with hurt pride, and a killing rageswept over her. She had listened with calm contempt while these women had underrated theConfederate Army, blackguarded Jeff Davis and accused Southerners of murder and torture of theirslaves. If it were to her advantage she would have endured insults about her own virtue andhonesty. But the knowledge that they had hurt the faithful old darky with their stupid remarks firedher like a match in gunpowder. For a moment she looked at the big horse pistol in Peters belt andher hands itched for the feel of it. They deserved killing, these insolent, ignorant, arrogantconquerors. But she bit down on her teeth until her jaw muscles stood out, reminding herself thatthe time had not yet come when she could tell the Yankees just what she thought of them. Someday, yes. My God, yes! But not yet.

Uncle Peter is one of our family, she said, her voice shaking. Good afternoon. Drive on,Peter.

Peter laid the whip on the horse so suddenly that the startled animal jumped forward and as thebuggy jounced off, Scarlett heard the Maine woman say with puzzled accents: Her family? Youdont suppose she meant a relative? Hes exceedingly black.

God damn them! They ought to be wiped off the face of the earth. If ever I get money enough,Ill spit in all their faces! IllShe glanced at Peter and saw that a tear was trickling down his nose. Instantly a passion oftenderness, of grief for his humiliation swamped her, made her eyes sting. It was as thoughsomeone had been senselessly brutal to a child. Those women had hurt Uncle PeterPeter whohad been through the Mexican War with old Colonel Hamilton, Peter who had held his master inhis arms when he died, who had raised Melly and Charles and looked after the feckless, foolishPittypat, pertecked her when she refugeed, and  quired a horse to bring her back from Maconthrough a war-torn country after the surrender. And they said they wouldnt trust niggers!

Peter, she said, her voice breaking as she put her hand on his thin arm. Im ashamed of youfor crying. What do you care? They arent anything but damned Yankees!

Dey talked in front of me lak Ah wuz a mule an couldn unnerstan demlak Ah wuz aAffikun an din know whut dey wuz talkin bout, said Peter, giving a tremendous sniff. An deycall me a nigger an Ah ain never been call a nigger by no wite folks, an dey call me a ole petan say dat niggers ain ter be trused! Me not ter be trused! Why, wen de ole Cunnel wuz dyin

he say ter me, You, Peter! You look affer mah chillun. Tek keer of yo young Miss Pittypat, hesay,  cause she ain got no mo sense dan a hoppergrass. An Ah done tek keer of her good alldese yars

Nobody but the Angel Gabriel could have done better, said Scarlett soothingly. We just couldnt have lived without you.

Yasm, thankee kinely, Mam. Ah knows it an you knows it, but dem Yankee folks doan knowit an dey doan want ter know it, Huccome dey come mixin in our bizness, Miss Scarlett? Deydoan unnerstan us Confedruts.

Scarlett said nothing for she was still burning with the wrath she had not exploded in the Yankeewomens faces. The two drove home in silence. Peters sniffles stopped and his underlip began toprotrude gradually until it stuck out alarmingly. His indignation was mounting, now that the initialhurt was subsiding.

Scarlett thought: What damnably queer people Yankees are! Those women seemed to think thatbecause Uncle Peter was black, he had no ears to hear with and no feelings, as tender as their own,to be hurt. They did not know that negroes had to be handled gently, as though they were children,directed, praised, petted, scolded. They didnt understand negroes or the relations between thenegroes and their former masters. Yet they had fought a war to free them. And having freed them,they didnt want to have anything to do with them, except to use them to terrorize Southerners.

They didnt like them, didnt trust them, didnt understand them, and yet their constant cry was thatSoutherners didnt know how to get along with them.

Not trust a darky! Scarlett trusted them far more than most white people, certainly more than shetrusted any Yankee. There were qualities of loyalty and tirelessness and love in them that no straincould break, no money could buy. She thought of the faithful few who remained at Tara in the faceof the Yankee invasion when they could have fled or joined the troops for lives of leisure. But theyhad stayed. She thought of Dilcey toiling in the cotton fields beside her, of Pork risking his life inneighboring hen houses that the family might eat, of Mammy coming to Atlanta with her to keepher from doing wrong. She thought of the servants of her neighbors who had stood loyally besidetheir white owners, protecting their mistresses while the men were at the front, refugeeing withthem through the terrors of the war, nursing the wounded, burying the dead, comforting thebereaved, working, begging, stealing to keep food the tables. And even now, with the FreedmensBureaupromisingallmannerofwonders,the(on) y still stuck with their white folks andworked much harder than they ever worked in slave times. But the Yankees didnt understand thesethings and would never understand them.

Yet they set you free, she said aloud.

No, Mam! Dey din sot me free. Ah wouldn let no sech trash sot me free, said Peterindignantly. Ah still blongs ter Miss Pitty an wen Ah dies she gwine lay me in de Hamiltonbuhyin groun whar Ah blongs. ... Mah Miss gwine ter be in a state wen Ah tells her bout howyou let dem Yankee women sult me.

I did no such thing! cried Scarlett, startled.

You did so, Miss Scarlett, said Peter, pushing out his lip even farther. De pint is, needer younor me had no bizness bein wid Yankees, so dey could sult me. Ef you hadnt talked wid dem,dey wouldn had no chance ter treat me lak a mule or a Affikun. An you din tek up fer me,needer.

I did, too! said Scarlett, stung by the criticism. Didnt I tell them you were one of the family?

Dat ain tekkin up. Dats jes a fac, said Peter. Miss Scarlett, you ain got no bizness havin

no truck wid Yankees. Ain no other ladies doin it. You wouldn ketch Miss Pitty wipin her lilshoes on sech trash. An she ain gwine lake it wen she hear bout whut dey said bout me.

Peters criticism hurt worse than anything Frank or Aunt Pitty or the neighbors had said and it soannoyed her she longed to shake the old darky until his toothless gums clapped together. WhatPeter said was true but she hated to hear it from a negro and a family negro, too. Not to stand highin the opinion of ones servants was as humiliating a thing as could happen to a Southerner.

A ole pet! Peter grumbled. Ah specs Miss Pitty aint gwine want me ter drive you roun nomo after dat. No, Mam!

Aunt Pitty will want you to drive me as usual, she said sternly, so lets hear no more aboutit.

Ahll git a mizry in mah back, warned Peter darkly. Mah back huttin me so bad dis minuteAh kain sceercely set up. Mah Miss ain gwine want me ter do no drivin wen Ah got a mizry. ...

Miss Scarlett, it ain gwine do you no good ter stan high wid de Yankees an de wite trash, ef yo

own folks doan prove of you.

That was as accurate a summing up of the situation as could be made and Scarlett relapsed intoinfuriated silence. Yes, the conquerors did approve of her and her family and her neighbors did not.

She knew all the things the town was saying about her. And now even Peter disapproved of her tothe point of not caring to be seen in public with her. That was the last straw.

Heretofore she had been careless of public opinion, careless and a little contemptuous. ButPeters words caused fierce resentment to burn in her breast, drove her to a defensive position,made her suddenly dislike her neighbors as much as she disliked the Yankees.

Why should they care what I do? she thought. They must think I enjoy associating withYankees and working like a field hand. Theyre just making a hard job harder for me. But I dontcare what they think. I wont let myself care. I cant afford to care now. But some daysome day

Oh some day! When there was security in her world again, then she would sit back and fold herhands and be a great lady as Ellen had been. She would be helpless and sheltered, as a lady shouldbe, and then everyone would approve of her. Oh, how grand she would be when she had moneyagain! Then she could permit herself to be kind and gentle, as Ellen had been, and thoughtful ofother people and of the proprieties, too. She would not be driven by fears, day and night, and lifewould be a placid, unhurried affair. She would have time to play with her children and listen totheir lessons. There would be long warm afternoons when ladies would call and, amid the rustlingsof taffeta petticoats and the rhythmic harsh cracklings of palmetto fans, she would serve tea anddelicious sandwiches and cakes and leisurely gossip the hours away. And she would be so kind tothose who were suffering misfortune, take baskets to the poor and soup and jelly to the sick andair those less fortunate in her fine carriage. She would be a lady in the true Southern manner, asher mother had been. And then, everyone would love her as they had loved Ellen and they wouldsay how unselfish she was and call her Lady Bountiful.

Her pleasure in these thoughts of the future was un-dimmed by any realization that she had noreal desire to be unselfish or charitable or kind. All she wanted was the reputation for possessingthese qualities. But the meshes of her brain were too wide, too coarse, to filter such smalldifferences. It was enough that some day, when she had money, everyone would approve of her.

Some day! But not now. Not now, in spite of what anyone might say of her. Now, there was notime to be a great lady.

Peter was as good as his word. Aunt Pitty did get into a state, and Peters misery developedovernight to such proportions that he never drove the buggy again. Thereafter Scarlett drove aloneand the calluses which had begun to leave her palms came back again.

So the spring months went by, the cool rains of April passing into the warm balm of green Mayweather. The weeks were packed with work and worry and the handicaps of increasing pregnancy,with old friends growing cooler and her family increasingly kind, more maddeningly solicitousandmorecompletelyblindtowhatwasdrivingher.During(more) those days of anxiety andstruggle there was only one dependable, understanding person in her world, and that person wasRhett Butler. It was odd that he of all people should appear in this light, for he was as unstable asquicksilver and as perverse as a demon fresh from the pit. But he gave her sympathy, somethingshe had never had from anyone and never expected from him.

Frequently he was out of town on those mysterious trips to New Orleans which he neverexplained but which she felt sure, in a faintly jealous way, were connected with a womanorwomen. But after Uncle Peters refusal to drive her, he remained in Atlanta for longer and longerintervals.

While in town, he spent most of his time gambling in the rooms above the Girl of the PeriodSaloon, or in Belle Watlings bar hobnobbing with the wealthier of the Yankees and Carpetbaggersin money-making schemes which made the townspeople detest him even more than his cronies. Hedid not call at the house now, probably in deference to the feelings of Frank and Pitty who wouldhave been outraged at a male caller while Scarlett was in a delicate condition. But she met him byaccident almost every day. Time and again, he came riding up to her buggy when she was passingthrough lonely stretches of Peachtree road and Decatur road where the mills lay. He always drewrein and talked and sometimes he tied his horse to the back of the buggy and drove her on herrounds. She tired more easily these days than she liked to admit and she was always silentlygrateful when he took the reins. He always left her before they reached the town again but allAtlanta knew about their meetings, and it gave the gossips something new to add to the long list ofScarletts affronts to the proprieties.

She wondered occasionally if these meetings were not more than accidental. They became moreand more numerous as the weeks went by and as the tension in town heightened over negrooutrages. But why did he seek her out, now of all times when she looked her worst? Certainly hehad no designs upon her if he had ever had any, and she was beginning to doubt even this. It hadbeen months since he made any joking references to their distressing scene at the Yankee jail. Henever mentioned Ashley and her love for him, or made any coarse and ill-bred remarks aboutcoveting her. She thought it best to let sleeping dogs lie, so she did not ask for an explanation oftheir frequent meetings. And finally she decided that, because he had little to do besides gamble and had few enough nice friends in Atlanta, he sought her out solely for companionships sake.

Whatever his reason might be, she found his company most welcome. He listened to her moansabout lost customers and bad debts, the swindling ways of Mr. Johnson and the incompetency ofHugh. He applauded her triumphs, where Frank merely smiled indulgently and Pitty said Dearme! in a dazed manner. She was sure that rich Yankees and Carpetbaggers intimately, but healways denied being helpful. She knew him for what he was and she never trusted him, but herspirits always rose with pleasure at the sight of him riding around the curve of a shady road on hisbig black horse. When he climbed into the buggy and took the reins from her and threw her someimpertinent remark, she felt young and gay and attractive again, for an her worries and herincreasing bulk. She could talk to him about almost everything, with no care for concealing hermotives or her real opinions and she never ran out of things to say as she did with Frankor evenwith Ashley, if she must be honest with herself. But of course, in all her conversations with Ashleythere were so many things which could not be said, for honors sake, that the sheer force of theminhibited other remarks. It comforting to have friend like Rhett, that for some unaccountablereasonhehaddec(was) idedtobeongoodbeh(a) aviorwithher.Verycom(now) forting, for shehad so few friends these days.

Rhett, she asked stormily, shortly after Uncle Peters ultimatum, why do folks in this towntreat me so scurvily and talk about me so? Its a toss-up who they talk worst about, me or theCarpetbaggers! Ive minded my own business and havent done anything wrong and

If you havent done anything wrong, its because you havent had the opportunity, and perhapsthey dimly realize it.

Oh, do be serious! They make me so mad. All Ive done is try to make a little money and

All youve done is to be different from other women and youve made a little success at it. AsIve told you before, that is the one unforgivable sin in any society. Be different and be damned!

Scarlett, the mere fact that youve made a success of your mill is an insult to every man who hasntsucceeded. Remember, a well-bred females place is in the home and she should know nothingabout this busy, brutal world.

But if I had stayed in my home, I wouldnt have had any home left to stay in.

The inference is that you should have starved genteelly and with pride.

Oh, fiddle-dee-dee! But look at Mrs. Merriwether. Shes selling pies to Yankees and thatsworse than running a sawmill, and Mrs. Elsing takes in sewing and keeps boarders, and Fannypaints awful-looking china things that nobody wants and everybody buys to help her and

But you miss the point, my pet. They arent successful and so they arent affronting the hotSouthern pride of their men folks. The men can still say, Poor sweet sillies, how hard they try!

Well, Ill let them think theyre helping.And besides, the ladies you mentioned dont enjoy havingto work. They let it be known that they are only doing it until some man conies along to relievethem of their unwomanly burdens. And so everybody feels sorry for them. But obviously you dolike to work and obviously you arent going to let any man tend to your business for you, and so noone can feel sorry for you. And Atlanta is never going to forgive you for that. Its so pleasant tofeel sorry for people.

I wish youd be serious, sometimes.

Did you ever hear the Oriental proverb: The dogs bark but the caravan passes on? Let thembark, Scarlett. I fear nothing will stop your caravan.

But why should they mind my making a little money?

You cant have everything, Scarlett. You can either make money in your present unladylikemanner and meet cold shoulders everywhere you go, or you can be poor and genteel and have lotsof friends. Youve made your choice.

I wont be poor, she said swiftly. Butit is the right choice, isnt it?

If its money you want most.

Yes, I want money more than anything else in the world.

Then youve made the only choice. But theres a penalty attached, as there is to most thingsyou want. Its loneliness.

That silenced her for a moment. It was true. When she stopped to think about it, she was a littlelonelylonely for feminine companionship. During the war years she had had Ellen to visit whenshe felt blue. And since Ellens death, there had always been Melanie, though she and Melanie hadnothing in common except the hard work at Tara. Now there was no one, for Aunt Pitty had noconception of life beyond her small round of gossip.

I thinkI think, she began hesitantly, that Ive always been lonely where women wereconcerned. It isnt just my working that makes Atlanta ladies dislike me. They just dont like meanyway. No woman ever really liked me, except Mother. Even my sisters. I dont know why, buteven before the war, even before I married Charlie, ladies didnt seem to approve of anything I did

You forget Mrs. Wilkes, said Rhett and his eyes gleamed maliciously. She has alwaysapproved of you up to the hilt. I daresay shed approve of anything you did, short of murder.

Scarlett thought grimly: Shes even approved of murder, and she laughed contemptuously.

Oh, Melly! she said, and then, ruefully: Its certainly not to my credit that Melly is the onlywoman who approves of me, for she hasnt the sense of a guinea hen. If she had any sense Shestopped in some confusion.

If she had any sense, shed realize a few things and she couldnt approve, Rhett finished.

Well, you know more about that than I do, of course.

Oh, damn your memory and your bad manners!

Ill pass over your unjustified rudeness with the silence it deserves and return to our formersubject. Make up your mind to this. If you are different; you are isolated, not only from people ofyour own age but from those of your parents generation and from your childrens generation too.

Theyll understand you and theyll be shocked no matter what you do. But yourgrandparentsw(never) ould probably be proud of you and say: Theres a chip off the old block, and yourgrandchildren will sigh enviously and say: What an old rip Grandma must have been! and theylltry to be like you.

Scarlett laughed with amusement.

Sometimes you do hit on the truth! Now there was my Grandma Robillard. Mammy used tohold her over my head whenever I was naughty. Grandma was as cold as an icicle and strict abouther manners and everybody elses manners, but she married three times and had any number ofduels fought over her and she wore rouge and the most shockingly low-cut dresses and nowell,ernot much under her dresses.

And you admired her tremendously, for all that you tried to be like your mother! I had agrandfather on the Butler side who was a pirate.

Not really! A walk-the-plank kind?

I daresay he made people walk the plank if there was any money to be made that way. At anyrate, he made enough money to leave my father quite wealthy. But the family always referred tohim carefully as a sea captain. He was killed in a saloon brawl long before I was born. His deathwas, needless to say, a great relief to his children, for the old gentleman was drunk most of thetime and when in his cups apt to forget that he retired sea captain and give reminiscencesthatcurledhischild(was) renshair.However,Iadmir(was) ed(a) him and tried to copy him farmore than I ever did my father, for Father is an amiable gentleman full of honorable habits andpious sawsso you see how it goes. Im sure your children wont approve of you, Scarlett, anymore than Mrs. Merriwether and Mrs. Elsing and their broods approve of you now. Your childrenwill probably be soft, prissy creatures, as the children of hard-bitten characters usually are. And tomake them worse, you, like every other mother, are probably determined that they shall neverknow the hardships youve known. And thats all wrong. Hardships make or break people. Soyoull have to wait for approval from your grandchildren.

I wonder what our grandchildren will be like!

Are you suggesting by that our that you and I will have mutual grandchildren? Fie, Mrs.

Kennedy!

Scarlett, suddenly conscious of her error of speech, went red. It was more than his joking wordsthat shamed her, for she was suddenly aware again of her thickening body. In no way had either ofthem ever hinted at her condition and she had always kept the lap robe high under her armpitswhen with him, even on warm days, comforting herself in the usual feminine manner with thebelief that she did not show at all when thus covered, and she was suddenly sick with quick rage ather own condition and shame that he should know.

You get out of this buggy, you dirty-minded varmint, she said, her voice shaking.

Ill do nothing of the kind, he returned calmly. Itll be dark before you get home and theres anew colony of darkies living in tents and shanties near the next spring, mean niggers Ive beentold, and I see no reason why you should give the impulsive Ku Klux a cause for putting on theirnightshirts and riding abroad this evening.

Get out! she cried, tugging at the reins and suddenly nausea overwhelmed her. He stopped thehorse quickly, passed her two clean handkerchiefs and held her head over the side of the buggywith some skill. The afternoon sun, slanting low through the newly leaved trees, spun sickeninglyfor a few moments in a swirl of gold and green. When the spell had passed, she put her head in her hands and cried from sheer mortification. Not only had she vomited before a manin itself ashorrible a contretemps as could overtake a womanbut by doing so, the humiliating fact of herpregnancy must now be evident. She felt that she could never look him in the face again. To havethis happen with him, of all people, with Rhett who had no respect for women! She cried,expecting some coarse and jocular remark from him which she would never be able to forget.

Dont be a fool, he said quietly. And you are a fool, if you are crying for shame. Come,Scarlett, dont be a child. Surely you must know that, not being blind, I knew you were pregnant.

She said Oh in a stunned voice and tightened her fingers over her crimson face. The worditself horrified her. Frank always referred to her pregnancy embarrassedly as your condition,

Gerald had been wont to say delicately in the family way, when he had to mention such matters,and ladies genteelly referred to pregnancy as being in a fix.

You are a child if you thought I didnt know, for all your smothering yourself under that hot laprobe. Of course, I knew. Why else do you think Ive been

He stopped suddenly and a silence fell between them. He picked up the reins and clucked to thehorse. He went on talking quietly and as his drawl fell pleasantly on her ears, some of the colorfaded from her down-tucked face.

I didnt think you could be so shocked, Scarlett. I thought you were a sensible person and Imdisappointed. Can it be possible that modesty still lingers in your breast? Im afraid Im not agentleman to have mentioned the matter. And I know Im not a gentleman, in view of the fact thatpregnant women do not embarrass me as they should. I find it possible to treat them as normalcreatures and not look at the ground or the sky or anywhere else in the universe except their waistlinesand then cast at them those furtive glances Ive always thought the height of indecency.

Why should I? Its a perfectly normal state. The Europeans are far more sensible than we are. Theycompliment expectant mothers upon their expectations. While I wouldnt advise going that far, stillits more sensible than our way of trying to ignore it. Its a normal state and women should beproud of it, instead of hiding behind closed doors as if theyd committed a crime.

Proud! she cried in a strangled voice. Proudugh!

Arent you proud to be having a child?

Oh dear God, no! II hate babies!

You meanFranks baby.

Noanybodys baby.

For a moment she went sick again at this new error of speech, but his voice went on as easily asthough he had not marked it.

Then were different. I like babies.

You like them? she cried, looking up, so startled at the statement that she forgot herembarrassment What a liar you are!

I like babies and I like little children, till they begin to grow up and acquire adult habits ofthought and adult abilities to lie and cheat and be dirty. That cant be news to you. You know I like Wade Hampton a lot, for all that he isnt the boy he ought to be.

That was true, thought Scarlett, suddenly marveling. He did seem to enjoy playing with Wadeand often brought him presents.

Now that weve brought this dreadful subject into the light and you admit that you expect ababy some time in the not too distant future, Ill say something Ive been wanting to say for weekstwo things. The first is that its dangerous for you to drive alone. You know it. Youve been toldit often enough. If you dont care personally whether or not you are raped, you might consider theconsequences. Because of your obstinacy, you may get yourself into a situation where your gallantfellow townsmen will be forced to avenge you by stringing up a few darkies. And that will bringthe Yankees down on them and someone will probably get hanged. Has it ever occurred to you thatperhaps one of the reasons the ladies do not like you is that your conduct may cause the neck-stretching of their sons and husbands? And furthermore, if the Ku Klux handles many morenegroes, the Yankees are going to tighten up on Atlanta in a way that will make Shermans conductlook angelic. I know what Im talking about, for Im hand in glove with the Yankees. Shameful tostate, they treat me as one of them and I hear them talk openly. They mean to stamp out the KuKlux if it means burning the whole town again and hanging every male over ten. That would hurtyou, Scarlett. You might lose money. And theres no telling where a prairie fire will stop, once itgets started. Confiscation of property, higher taxes, fines for suspected womenIve heard themall suggested. The Ku Klux

Do you know any Ku Klux? Is Tommy Wellburn or Hugh or

He shrugged impatiently.

How should I know? Im a renegade, a turncoat, a Scalawag. Would I be likely to know? But Ido know men who are suspected by the Yankees and one false move from them and they are asgood as hanged. While I know you would have no regrets at getting your neighbors on the gallows,I do believe youd regret losing your mills. I see by the stubborn look on your face that you do notbelieve me and my words are falling on stony ground. So all I can say is, keep that pistol of yourshandyand when Im in town, Ill try to be on hand to drive you.

Rhett, do you reallyis it to protect me that you

Yes, my dear, it is my much advertised chivalry that makes me protect you. The mocking lightbegan to dance in his black eyes and all signs of earnestness fled from his face. And why?

Because of my deep love for you, Mrs. Kennedy. Yes, I have silently hungered and thirsted for youand worshipped you from afar; but being an honorable man, like Mr. Ashley Wilkes, I haveconcealed it from you. You are, alas, Franks wife and honor has forbidden my telling this to you.

But even as Mr. Wilkes honor cracks occasionally, so mine is cracking now and I reveal my secretpassion and my

Chapter 39

THE TRAIN was very late and the long, deeply blue twilight of June was settling over thecountryside when Scarlett alighted in Jonesboro. Yellow gleams of lamplight showed in the storesand houses which remained in the village, but they were few. Here and there were wide gapsbetween the buildings on the main street where dwellings had been shelled or burned. Ruinedhouses with shell holes in their roofs and half the walls torn away stared at her, silent and dark. Afew saddle horses and mule teams were hitched outside the wooden awning of Bullards store. Thedusty red road was empty and lifeless, and the only sounds in the village were a few whoops anddrunken laughs that floated on the still twilight air from a saloon far down the street.

The depot had not been rebuilt since it was burned in the battle and in its place was only awooden shelter, with no sides to keep out the weather. Scarlett walked under it and sat down onone of the empty kegs that were evidently put there for seats. She peered up and down the streetfor Will Benteen. Will should have been here to meet her. He should have known she would takethe first tram possible after receiving his laconic message that Gerald was dead.

She had come so hurriedly that she had in her small carpetbag only a nightgown and a toothbrush, not even a change of underwear. She was uncomfortable in the tight black dress she hadborrowed from Mrs. Meade, for she had had no time to get mourning clothes for herself. Mrs.

Meade thin now, and Scarletts pregnancy being advanced, the dress was doublyuncomfortab(was) le. Even in her sorrow at Geralds death, she did not forget the appearance she wasmaking and she looked down at her body with distaste. Her figure was completely gone and herface and ankles were puffy. Heretofore she had not cared very much how she looked but now thatshe would see Ashley within the hour she cared greatly. Even in her heartbreak, she shrank fromthe thought of facing him when she was carrying another mans child. She loved him and he lovedher, and this unwanted child now seemed to her a proof of infidelity to that love. But much as shedisliked having him see her with the slenderness gone from her waist and the lightness from herstep, it was something she could not escape now.

She patted her foot impatiently. Will should have met her. Of course, she could go over toBullards and inquire after him or ask someone there to drive her over to Tara, should she find hehad been unable to come. But she did not want to go to Bullards. It was Saturday night andprobably half the men of the County would be there. She did not want to display her condition inthis poorly fitting black dress which accentuated rather than hid her figure. And she did not want tohear the kindly sympathy that would be poured out about Gerald. She did not want sympathy. Shewas afraid she would cry if anyone even mentioned his name to her. And she wouldnt cry. Sheknew if she once began it would be like the time she cried into the horses mane, that dreadfulnight when Atlanta fell and Rhett had left her on the dark road outside the town, terrible tears thattore her heart and could not be stopped.

No, she wouldnt cry! She felt the lump in her throat rising again, as it had done so often sincethe news came, but crying wouldnt do any good. It would only confuse and weaken her. Why, oh,why hadnt Will or Melanie or the girls written her that Gerald was ailing? She would have takenthe first train to Tara to care for him, brought a doctor from Atlanta if necessary. The foolsall ofthem! Couldnt they manage anything without her? She couldnt be in two places at once and thegood Lord knew she was doing her best for them all in Atlanta.

She twisted about on the keg, becoming nervous and fidgety as Will still did not come. Wherewas he? Then she heard the scrunching of cinders on the railroad tracks behind her and, twistingher body, she saw Alex Fontaine crossing the tracks toward a wagon, a sack of oats on hisshoulder.

Good Lord! Isnt that you, Scarlett? he cried, dropping the sack and running to take her hand,pleasure written all over his bitter, swarthy little face. Im so glad to see you. I saw Will over atthe blacksmiths shop, getting the horse shod. The train was late and he thought hed have time.

Shall I run fetch him?

Yes, please, Alex, she said, smiling in spite of her sorrow. It was good to see a County faceagain.

OherScarlett, he began awkwardly, still holding her hand, Im mighty sorry about yourfather.

Thank you, she replied, wishing he had not said it. His words brought up Geralds florid faceand bellowing voice so clearly.

If its any comfort to you, Scarlett, were mighty proud of him around here, Alex continued,dropping her hand. Hewell, we figure he died like a soldier and in a soldiers cause.

Now what did he mean by that, she thought confusedly. A soldier? Had someone shot him? Hadhe gotten into a fight with the Scalawags as Tony had? But she mustnt hear more. She would cryif she talked about him and she mustnt cry, not until she was safely in the wagon with Will and outin the country where no stranger could see her. Will wouldnt matter. He was just like a brother.

Alex, I dont want to talk about it, she said shortly.

I dont blame you one bit, Scarlett, said Alex while the dark blood of anger flooded his face.

If it was my sister, Idwell, Scarlett, Ive never yet said a harsh word about any woman, butpersonally I think somebody ought to take a rawhide whip to Suellen.

What foolishness was he talking about now, she wondered. What had Suellen to do with it all?

Everybody around here feels the same way about her, Im sorry to say. Wills the only one whotakes up for herand, of course, Miss Melanie, but shes a saint and wont see bad in anyone and

I said I didnt want to talk about it, she said coldly but Alex did not seem rebuffed. He lookedas though he understood her rudeness and that was annoying. She didnt want to hear bad tidingsabout her own family from an outsider, didnt want him to know of her ignorance of what hadhappened. Why hadnt Will sent her the full details?

She wished Alex wouldnt look at her so hard. She felt that he realized her condition and itembarrassed her. But what Alex was thinking as he peered at her in the twilight was that her facehad changed so completely he wondered how he had ever recognized her. Perhaps it was becauseshe was going to have a baby. Women did look like the devil at such times. And, of course, shemust be feeling badly about old man OHara. She had been his pet. But, no, the change was deeperthan that. She really looked as if she had three square meals a day. And the hunted-animal look hadpartly gone from her eyes. Now, the eyes which had been fearful and desperate were hard. Therewas an air of command, assurance and determination about her, even when she smiled. Bet she ledold Frank a merry life! Yes, she had changed. She was a handsome woman, to be sure, but all thatpretty, sweet softness had gone from her face and that flattering way of looking up at a man, likehe knew more than God Almighty, had utterly vanished.

Well, hadnt they all changed? Alex looked down at his rough clothes and his face fell into itsusual bitter lines. Sometimes at night when he lay awake, wondering how his mother was going toget that operation and how poor dead Joes little boy was going to get an education and how hewas going to get money for another mule, he wished the war was still going on, wished it had goneon forever. They didnt know their luck then. There was always something to eat in the army, evenif it was just corn bread, always somebody to give orders and none of this torturing sense of facingproblems that couldnt be solvednothing to bother about in the army except getting killed. Andthen there was Dimity Munroe. Alex wanted to marry her and he knew he couldnt when so manywere already looking to him for support. He had loved her for so long and now the roses werefading from her cheeks and the joy from her eyes. If only Tony hadnt had to run away to Texas.

Another man on the place would make all the difference in the world. His lovable bad-temperedlittle brother, penniless somewhere in the West. Yes, they had all changed. And why not? He sighedheavily.

I havent thanked you for what you and Frank did for Tony, he said. It was you who helpedhim get away, wasnt it? It was fine of you. I heard in a roundabout way that he was safe in Texas.

I was afraid to write and ask youbut did you or Frank lend him any money? I want to repay

Oh, Alex, please hush! Not now! cried Scarlett For once, money meant nothing to her.

Alex was silent for a moment.

Ill get Will for you, he said, and well all be over tomorrow for the funeral.

As he picked up the sack of oats and turned away, a wobbly-wheeled wagon swayed out of aside street and creaked up to them. Will called from the seat: Im sorry Im late, Scarlett.

Climbing awkwardly down from the wagon, he stumped toward her and, bending, kissed hercheek. Will had never kissed her before, had never failed to precede her name with Miss and,while it surprised her, it warmed her heart and pleased her very much. He lifted her carefully overthe wheel and into the wagon and, looking down, she saw that it was the same old rickety wagon inwhich she had fled from Atlanta. How had it ever held together so long? Will must have kept itpatched up very well. It made her slightly sick to look at it and to remember that night. If it tookthe shoes off her feet or food from Aunt Pittys table, shed see that there was a new wagon at Taraand this one burned.

Will did not speak at first and Scarlett was grateful. He threw his battered straw hat into the backof the wagon, clucked to the horse and they moved off. Will was just the same, lank and gangling,pink of hair, mild of eye, patient as a draft animal.

They left the village behind and turned into the red road to Tara. A faint pink still lingered aboutthe edges of the sky and fat feathery clouds were tinged with gold and palest green. The stillness ofthe country twilight came down about them as calming as a prayer. How had she ever borne it, shethought, away for all these months, away from the fresh smell of country air, the plowed earth andthe sweetness of summer nights? The moist red earth smelled so good, so familiar, so friendly, shewanted to get out and scoop up a handful. The honeysuckle which draped the gullied red sides ofthe road in tangled greenery was piercingly fragrant as always after rain, the sweetest perfume inthe world. Above their heads a flock of chimney swallows whirled suddenly on swift wings andnow and then a rabbit scurried startled across the road, his white tail bobbing like an eiderdownpowder puff. She saw with pleasure that the cotton stood well, as they passed between plowedfields where the green bushes reared themselves sturdily out of the red earth. How beautiful all thiswas! The soft gray mist in the swampy bottoms, the red earth and growing cotton, the slopingfields with curving green rows and the black pines rising behind everything like sable walls. Howhad she ever stayed in Atlanta so long?

Scarlett, before I tell you about Mr. OHaraand I want to tell you everything before you gethomeI want to ask your opinion on a matter. I figger youre the head of the house now.

What is it, Will?

He turned his mild sober gaze on her for a moment.

I just wanted your approval to my marryin Suellen.

Scarlett clutched the seat, so surprised that she almost fell backwards. Marry Suellen! Shednever thought of anybody marrying Suellen since she had taken Frank Kennedy from her. Whowould have Suellen?

Goodness, Will!

Then I take it you dont mind?

Mind? No, but Why, Will, youve taken my breath away! You marry Suellen? Will, I alwaysthought you were sweet on Carreen.

Will kept his eyes on the horse and flapped the reins. His profile did not change but she thoughthe sighed slightly.

Maybe I was, he said.

Well, wont she have you?

I never asked her.

Oh, Will, youre a fool. Ask her. Shes worth two of Suellen!

Scarlett, you dont know a lot of things thats been going on at Tara. You aint favored us withmuch of your attention these last months.

I havent, havent I? she flared. What do you suppose Ive been doing in Atlanta? Ridingaround in a coach and four and going to balls? Havent I sent you money every month? Havent Ipaid the taxes and fixed the roof and bought the new plow and the mules? Havent

Now, dont fly off the handle and get your Irish up, he interrupted imperturbably. If anybodyknows what youve done, I do, and its been two mens work.

Slightly mollified, she questioned, Well then, what do you mean?

Well, youve kept the roof over us and food in the pantry and I aint denyin that, but you aintgiven much thought to whats been goin on in anybodys head here at Tara. I aint blamin you,Scarlett. Thats just your way. You warnt never very much interested in what was in folks heads.

But what Im tryin to tell you is that I didnt never ask Miss Carreen because I knew it wouldntbe no use. Shes been like a little sister to me and I guess she talks to me plainer than to anybody inthe world. But she never got over that dead boy and she never will. And I might as well tell younow shes aimin to go in a convent over to Charleston.

Are you joking?

Well, I knew it would take you back and I just want to ask you, Scarlett, dont you argue withher about it or scold her or laugh at her. Let her go. Its all she wants now. Her hearts broken.

But Gods nightgown! Lots of peoples hearts have been broken and they didnt run off toconvents. Look at me. I lost a husband.

But your heart warnt broken, Will said calmly and, picking up a straw from the bottom of thewagon, he put it in his mouth and chewed slowly. That remark took the wind out of her. As alwayswhen she heard the truth spoken, no matter how unpalatable it was, basic honesty forced her toacknowledge it as truth. She was silent a moment, trying to accustom herself to the idea of Carreenas a nun.

Promise you wont fuss at her.

Oh, well, I promise, and then she looked at him with understanding and some amazement.WillhadlovedCarreen,lovedhernowenoughtotak(a) eher(new) part and make her retreateasy. And yet he wanted to marry Suellen.

Well, whats all this about Suellen? You dont care for her, do you?

Oh, yes, I do in a way, he said removing the straw and surveying it as if it were highlyinteresting. Suellen aint as bad as you think, Scarlett. I think well get along right well. The onlytrouble with Suellen is that she needs a husband and some children and thats just what every woman needs.

The wagon jolted over the rutty road and for a few minutes while the two sat silent Scarlettsmind was busy. There must be something more to it than appeared on the surface, somethingdeeper, more important, to make the mild and soft-spoken Will want to marry a complainingnagger like Suellen.

You havent told me the real reason, Will. If Im head of the family, Ive got a right to know.

Thats right, said Will, and I guess youll understand. I cant leave Tara. Its home to me,Scarlett, the only real home I ever knew and I love every stone of it. Ive worked on it like it wasmine. And when you put out work on somethin, you come to love it. You know what I mean?

She knew what he meant and her heart went out in a surge of warm affection for him, hearinghim say he, too, loved the thing she loved best.

And I figger it this way. With your pa gone and Carreen a nun, therell be just me and Suellenleft here and, of course, I couldnt live on at Tara without marryin Suellen. You know how folkstalk.

Butbut Will, theres Melanie and Ashley

At Ashleys name he turned and looked at her, his pale eyes unfathomable. She had the oldfeeling that Will knew all about her and Ashley, understood all and did not either censure orapprove.

Theyll be goin soon.

Going? Where? Tara is their home as well as yours.

No, it aint their home. Thats just whats eatin on Ashley. It aint his home and he dont feellike hes earnin his keep. Hes a mighty pore farmer and he knows it. God knows he tries his bestbut he warnt cut out for farmin and you know it as well as I do. If he splits kindlin, like as nothell slice off his foot. He cant no more keep a plow straight in a furrow than little Beau can, andwhat he dont know about makin things grow would fill a book. It aint his fault. He just warntbred for it. And it worries him that hes a man livin at Tara on a womans charity and not givin

much in return.

Charity? Has he ever said

No, hes never said a word. You know Ashley. But I can tell. Last night when we were sittin upwith your pa, I tole him I had asked Suellen and shed said Yes. And then Ashley said that relievedhim because hed been feelin like a dog, stayin on at Tara, and he knew he and Miss Melly wouldhave to keep stayin on, now that Mr. OHara was dead, just to keep folks from talkin about meand Suellen. So then he told me he was aimin to leave Tara and get work.

Work? What kind? Where?

I dont know exactly what hell do but he said he was goin up North. Hes got a Yankee friendin New York who wrote him about workin in a bank up there.

Oh, no! cried Scarlett from the bottom of her heart and, at the cry, Will gave her the same lookas before.

Maybe twould be better all round if he did go North.

No! No! I dont think so.

Her mind was working feverishly. Ashley couldnt go North! She might never see him again.

Even though she had not seen him in months, had not spoken to him alone since that fateful scenein the orchard, there had not been a day when she had not thought of him, been glad he wassheltered under her roof. She had never sent a dollar to Will that she had not been pleased that itwould make Ashleys life easier. Of course, he wasnt any good as a farmer. Ashley was bred forbetter things, she thought proudly. He was born to rule, to live in a large house, ride fine horses,read books of poetry and tell negroes what to do. That there were no more mansions and horsesand negroes and few books did not alter matters. Ashley wasnt bred to plow and split rails. Nowonder he wanted to leave Tara.

But she could not let him go away from Georgia. If necessary, she would bully Frank into givinghim a job in the store, make Frank turn off the boy he now had behind the counter. But, noAshleys place was no more behind a counter than it was behind a plow. A Wilkes a shopkeeper!

Oh, never that! There must be somethingwhy, her mill of course! Her relief at the thought wasso great that she smiled. But would he accept an offer from her? Would he still think it wascharity? She must manage it so he would think he was doing her a favor. She would discharge Mr.

Johnson and put Ashley in charge of the old mill while Hugh operated the new one. She wouldexplain to Ashley how Franks ill health and the pressure of work at the store kept him fromhelping her, and she would plead her condition as another reason why she needed his help.

She would make him realize somehow that she couldnt do without his aid at this time. And shewould give him a half-interest in the mill, if he would only take it overanything just to have himnear her, anything to see that bright smile light up his face, anything for the chance of catching anunguarded look in his eyes that showed he still cared. But, she promised herself, never, neverwould she again try to prod him into words of love, never again would she try to make him throwaway that foolish honor he valued more than love. Somehow, she must delicately convey to himthis new resolution of hers. Otherwise he might refuse, fearing another scene such as that last terribleone had been.

I can get him something to do in Atlanta, she said.

Well, thats yours and Ashleys business, said Will and put the straw back in his mouth.

Giddap, Sherman. Now, Scarlett, theres somethin else Ive got to ask you before I tell you aboutyour pa. I wont have you lightin into Suellen. What shes done, shes done, and you snatchin herbaldheaded wont bring Mr. OHara back. Besides she honestly thought she was actin for thebest!

I wanted to ask you about that What is all this about Suellen? Alex talked riddles and said sheought to be whipped. What has she done?

Yes, folks are pretty riled up about her. Everybody I run into this afternoon in Jonesboro waspromisin to cut her dead the next time they seen her, but maybe theyll get over it. Now, promiseme you wont light into her. I wont be havin no quarrelin tonight with Mr. OHara layin dead inthe parlor.

He wont be having any quarreling! thought Scarlett, indignantly. He talks like Tara was hisalready!

And then she thought of Gerald, dead in the parlor, and suddenly she began to cry, cry in bitter,gulping sobs. Will put his arm around her, drew her comfortably close and said nothing.

As they jolted slowly down the darkening road, her head on his shoulder, her bonnet askew, shehad forgotten the Gerald of the last two years, the vague old gentleman who stared at doors waitingfor a woman who would never enter. She was remembering the vital, virile old man with his maneof crisp white hair, his bellowing cheerfulness, his stamping boots, his clumsy jokes, hisgenerosity. She remembered how, as a child, he had seemed the most wonderful man in the world,this blustering father who carried her before him on his saddle when he jumped fences, turned herup and paddled her when she was naughty, and then cried when she cried and gave her quarters toget her to hush. She remembered him coming home from Charleston and Atlanta laden with giftsthat were never appropriate, remembered too, with a faint smile through tears, how he came homein the wee hours from Court Day at Jonesboro, drunk as seven earls, jumping fences, his rollickingvoice raised in The Wearin o the Green. And how abashed he was, facing Ellen on the morningafter. Well, he was with Ellen now.

Why didnt you write me that he was ill? Id have come so fast

He warnt ill, not a minute. Here, honey, take my handkerchief and Ill tell you all about it.

She blew her nose on his bandanna, for she had come from Atlanta without even a handkerchief,and settled back into the crook of Wills arm. How nice Will was. Nothing ever upset him.

Well, it was this way, Scarlett. You been sendin us money right along and Ashley and me, well,weve paid taxes and bought the mule and seeds and what-all and a few hogs and chickens. MissMellys done mighty well with the hens, yes sir, she has. Shes a fine woman, Miss Melly is. Well,anyway, after we bought things for Tara, there warnt so much left over for folderols, but none ofus warnt complainin. Except Suellen.

Miss Melanie and Miss Carreen stay at home and wear their old clothes like theyre proud ofthem but you know Suellen, Scarlett. She hasnt never got used to doin without. It used to stick inher craw that she had to wear old dresses every time I took her into Jonesboro or over toFayetteville. Specially as some of those Carpetbaggers ladi-women was always flouncin aroundin fancy trimmins. The wives of those damn Yankees that run the Freedmens Bureau, do theydress up! Well, its kind of been a point of honor with the ladies of the County to wear their worstlookin

dresses to town, just to show how they didnt care and was proud to wear them. But not Suellen.

And she wanted a hone and carriage too. She pointed out that you had one.

Its not a carriage, its an old buggy, said Scarlett indignantly.

Well, no matter what. I might as well tell you Suellen never has got over your marryin FrankKennedy and I dont know as I blame her. You know that was a kind of scurvy trick to play on asister.

Scarlett rose from his shoulder, furious as a rattler ready to strike.

Scurvy trick, hey? Ill thank you to keep a civil tongue in your head, Win Benteen! Could I help it if he preferred me to her?

Youre a smart girl, Scarlett, and I figger, yes, you could have helped him preferrin you. Girlsalways can. But I guess you kind of coaxed him. Youre a mighty takin person when you want tobe, but all the same, he was Suellens beau. Why, shed had a letter from him a week before youwent to Atlanta and he was sweet as sugar about her and talked about how theyd get married whenhe got a little more money ahead. I know because she showed me the letter.

Scarlett was silent because she knew he was telling the truth and she could think of nothing tosay. She had never expected Will, of all people, to sit in judgment on her. Moreover the lie she hadtold Frank had never weighed heavily upon her conscience. If a girl couldnt keep a beau, shedeserved to lose him.

Now, Will, dont be mean, she said. If Suellen had married him, do you think shed ever havespent a penny on Tara or any of us?

I said you could be right takin when you wanted to, said Will, turning to her with a quiet grin.

No, I dont think wed ever seen a penny of old Franks money. But still theres no gettin roundit, it was a scurvy trick and if you want to justify the end by the means, its none of my businessand who am I to complain? But just the same Suellen has been like a hornet ever since. I dontthink she cared much about old Frank but it kind of teched her vanity and shes been sayin as howyou had good clothes and a carriage and lived in Atlanta while she was buried here at Tara. Shedoes love to go callin and to parties, you know, and wear pretty clothes. I aint blamin her.

Women are like that.

Well, about a month ago I took her into Jonesboro and left her to go callin while I tended tobusiness and when I took her home, she was still as a mouse but I could see she was so excited shewas ready to bust. I thought shed found out somebody was goin to have athat shed heard somegossip that was interestin, and I didnt pay her much mind. She went around home for about aweek all swelled up and excited and didnt have much to say. She went over to see Miss CathleenCalvertScarlett, youd cry your eyes out at Miss Cathleen. Pore girl, shed better be dead thanmarried to that pusillanimous Yankee Hilton. You knew hed mortaged the place and lost it andtheyre goin to have to leave?

No, I didnt know and I dont want to know. I want to know about Pa.

Well, Im gettin to that, said Will patiently. When she come back from over there she saidwed all misjudged Hilton, She called him Mr. Hilton and she said he was a smart man, but we justlaughed at her. Then she took to takin your pa out to walk in the afternoons and lots of times whenI was comin home from the field, Id see her sittin with him on the wall round the buryin

ground, talkin at him hard and wavin her hands. And the old gentleman would just look at her sortof puzzled-like and shake his head. You know how hes been, Scarlett. He just got kind of vaguerand vaguer, like he didnt hardly know where he was or who we were. One time, I seen her point toyour mas grave and the old gentleman begun to cry. And when she come in the house all happyand excited lookin, I gave her a talkin to, right sharp, too, and I said: Miss Suellen, why in hellare you devilin your poor pa and bringin up your ma to him? Most of the time he dont realizeshes dead and here you are rubbin it in. And she just kind of tossed her head and laughed andsaid: Mind your business. Some day youll be glad of what Im doin. Miss Melanie told me last night that Suellen had told her about her schemes but Miss Melly said she didnt have no notionSuellen was serious. She said she didnt tell none of us because she was so upset at the very idea.

What idea? Are you ever going to get to the point? Were halfway home now. I want to knowabout Pa.

Im trying to tell you, said Will, and were so near home, I guess Id better stop right here tillIve finished.

He drew rein and the horse stopped and snorted. They had halted by the wild overgrown mock-orange hedge that marked the Macintosh property. Glancing under the dark trees Scarlett could justdiscern the tall ghostly chimneys still rearing above the silent ruin. She wished that Will hadchosen any other place to stop.

Well, the long and the short of her idea was to make the Yankees pay for the cotton they burnedand the stock they drove off and the fences and the barns they tore down.

The Yankees?

Havent you heard about it? The Yankee governments been payin claims on all destroyedproperty of Union sympathizers in the South.

Of course Ive heard about that, said Scarlett But whats that got to do with us?

A heap, in Suellens opinion. That day I took her to Jonesboro, she run into Mrs. Macintosh andwhen they were gossipin along, Suellen couldnt help noticin what fine-lookin clothes Mrs.

Macintosh had on and she couldnt help askin about them. Then Mrs. Macintosh gave herself a lotof airs and said as how her husband had put in a claim with the Federal government for destroyin

the property of a loyal Union sympathizer who had never given aid and comfort to theConfederacy in any shape or form.

They never gave aid and comfort to anybody, snapped Scarlett. Scotch-Irish!

Well, maybe thats true. I dont know them. Anyway, the government gave them, wellI forgethow many thousand dollars. A right smart sum it was, though. That started Suellen. She thoughtabout it all week and didnt say nothin to us because she knew wed just laugh. But she just had totalk to somebody so she went over to Miss Cathleens and that damned white trash, Hilton, gaveher a passel of new ideas. He pointed out that your pa warnt even born in this country, that hehadnt fought in the war and hadnt had no sons to fight, and hadnt never held no office under theConfederacy. He said they could strain a point about Mr. OHara bein a loyal Union sympathizer.

He filled her up with such truck and she come home and begun workin on Mr. OHara. Scarlett, Ibet my life your pa didnt even know half the time what she was talkin about. That was what shewas countin on, that he would take the Iron Clad oath and not even know it.

Pa take the Iron Clad oath! cried Scarlett.

Well, hed gotten right feeble in his mind these last months and I guess she was countin onthat. Mind you, none of us sospicioned nothin about it. We knew she was cookin up somethin,but we didnt know she was usin your dead ma to reproach him for his daughters bein in ragswhen he could get a hundred and fifty thousand dollars out of the Yankees.

One hundred and fifty thousand dollars, murmured Scarlett, her horror at the oath fading.

What a lot of money that was! And to be had for the mere signing of an oath of allegiance to theUnited States government, an oath stating that the signer had always supported the government andnever given aid and comfort to its enemies. One hundred and fifty thousand dollars! That muchmoney for that small a lie! Well, she couldnt blame Suellen. Good heavens! Was that what Alexmeant by wanting to rawhide her? What the County meant by intending to cut her? Fools, everyone of them. What couldnt she do with that much money! What couldnt any of the folks in theCounty do with it! And what did so small a lie matter? After all, anything you could get out of theYankees was fair money, no matter how you got it.

Yesterday, about noon when Ashley and me were splittin rails, Suellen got this wagon and gotyour pa in it and off they went to town without a word to anybody. Miss Melly had a notion what itwas all about but she was prayin somethin would change Suellen, so she didnt say nothin to therest of us. She just didnt see how Suellen could do such a thing.

Today I heard all about what happened. That pusillanimous fellow, Hilton, had some influencewith the other Scalawags and Republicans in town and Suellen had agreed to give them some ofthe moneyI dont know how muchif theyd kind of wink their eye about Mr. OHara bein aloyal Union man and play on how he was an Irishman and didnt fight in the army and so on, andsign recommendations. All your pa had to do was take the oath and sign the paper and off it wouldgo to Washington.

They rattled off the oath real fast and he didnt say nothin and it went right well till she gothim up to the signin of it. And then the old gentleman kind of come to himself for a minute andshook his head. I dont think he knew what it was all about but he didnt like it and Suellen alwaysdid rub him the wrong way. Well, that just about gave her the nervous fits after all the trouble shedgone to. She took him out of the office and rode him up and down the road and talked to him aboutyour ma cryin out of her grave at him for lettin her children suffer when he could provide forthem. They tell me your pa sat there in the wagon and cried like a baby, like he always does whenhe hears her name. Everybody in town saw them and Alex Fontaine went over to see what was thematter, but Suellen gave him the rough side of her tongue and told him to mind his own business,so he went off mad.

I dont know where she got the notion but some time in the afternoon she got a bottle of brandyand took Mr. OHara back to the office and begun pourin it for him. Scarlett, we havent had nospirits round Tara for a year, just a little blackberry wine and scuppernong wine Dilcey makes,and Mr. OHara warnt used to it. He got real drunk, and after Suellen had argued and nagged acouple of hours he gave in and said Yes, hed sign anything she wanted. They got the oath outagain and just as he was about to put pen to paper, Suellen made her mistake. She said: Well, now.

I guess the Slatterys and the Macintoshes wont be givin themselves airs over us! You see,Scarlett, the Slatterys had put in a claim for a big amount for that little shack of theirs that theYankees burned and Emmies husband had got it through Washington for them.

They tell me that when Suellen said those names, your pa kind of straightened up and squaredhis shoulders and looked at her, sharp-like. He warnt vague no more and he said: Have theSlatterys and the Macintoshes signed somethin like this? and Suellen got nervous and said Yesand No and stuttered and he shouted right loud: Tell me, did that God-damned Orangeman and thatGod-damned poor white sign somethin like this? And that feller Hilton spoke up smooth-like and said: Yes sir, they did and they got a pile of money like youll get.

And then the old gentleman let out a roar like a bull. Alex Fontaine said he heard him fromdown the street at the saloon. And he said with a brogue you could cut with a butterknife: Andwere ye afther thinkin an OHara of Tara would be follyin the dirthy thracks of a God-damnedOrangeman and a God-damned poor white? And he tore the paper in two and threw it in Suellensface and he bellowed: Yere no daughter of mine! and he was out of the office before you couldsay Jack Robinson.

Alex said he saw him come out on the street, chargin like a bull. He said the old gentlemanlooked like his old self for the first time since your ma died. Said he was reelin drunk and cussin

at the top of his lungs. Alex said he never heard such fine cussin. Alexs horse was standin thereand your pa climbed on it without a by-your-leave and off he went in a cloud of dust so thick itchoked you, cussin every breath he drew.

Well, about sundown Ashley and me were sittin on the front step, lookin down the road andmighty worried. Miss Melly was upstairs cryin on her bed and wouldnt tell us nothin. Terrectly,we heard a poundin down the road and somebody yellin like they was fox huntin and Ashleysaid: Thats queer! That sounds like Mr. OHara when he used to ride over to see us before thewar.

And then we seen him way down at the end of the pasture. He must have jumped the fenceright over there. And he come ridin hell-for-leather up the hill, singin at the top of his voice likehe didnt have a care in the world. I didnt know your pa had such a voice. He was singin Peg in aLow-backed Car and beatin the horse with his hat and the horse was goin like mad. He didntdraw rein when he come near the top and we seen he was goin to jump the pasture fence and wehopped up, scared to death, and then he yelled: Look, Ellen! Watch me take this one! But thehorse stopped right on his haunches at the fence and wouldnt take the jump and your pa went rightover his head. He didnt suffer none. He was dead time we got to him. I guess it broke his neck.

Will waited a minute for her to speak and when she did not he picked up the reins. Giddap,Sherman, he said, and the horse started on toward home.

Chapter 40

SCARLETT SLEPT little that night. When the dawn had come and the sun was creeping overthe black pines on the hills to the east, she rose from her tumbled bed and, seating herself on astool by the window, laid her tired head on her arm and looked out over the barn yard and orchardof Tara toward the cotton fields. Everything was fresh and dewy and silent and green and the sightof the cotton fields brought a measure of balm and comfort to her sore heart. Tara, at sunrise,looked loved, well tended and at peace, for all that its master lay dead. The squatty log chickenhouse was clay daubed against rats weasels and clean with whitewash, and so was the log stable.

The garden with its rows of corn, bright-yellow squash, butter beans and turnips was well weededand neatly fenced with split-oak rails. The orchard was cleared of underbrush and only daisiesgrew beneath the long rows of trees. The sun picked out with faint glistening the apples and thefurred pink peaches half hidden in the green leaves. Beyond lay the curving rows of cotton, still and green under the gold of the new sky. The ducks and chickens were waddling and strutting offtoward the fields, for under the bushes in the soft plowed earth were found the choicest worms andslugs.

Scarletts heart swelled with affection and gratitude to Will who had done all of this. Even herloyalty to Ashley could not make her believe he had been responsible for much of this well-being,for Taras bloom was not the work of a planter-aristocrat, but of the plodding, tireless smallfarmer who loved his land. It was a two-horse farm, not the lordly plantation of other days withpastures full of mules and fine horses and cotton and corn stretching as far as eye could see. Butwhat there was of it was good and the acres that were lying fallow could be reclaimed when timesgrew better, and they would be the more fertile for their rest.

Will had done more than merely farm a few acres. He had kept sternly at bay those two enemiesof Georgia planters, the seedling pine and the blackberry brambles. They had not stealthily takengarden and pasture and cotton field and lawn and reared themselves insolently by the porches ofTara, as they were doing on numberless plantations throughout the state.

Scarletts heart failed a beat when she thought how close Tara had come to going back towilderness. Between herself and Will, they had done a good job. They had held off the Yankees,the Carpetbaggers and the encroachments of Nature. And, best of all, Will had told her that afterthe cotton came in in the fall, she need send no more moneyunless some other Carpetbaggercoveted Tara and skyrocketed the taxes. Scarlett knew Will would have a hard pull without herhelp but she admired and respected his independence. As long as he was in the position of hiredhelp he would take her money, but now that he was to become her brother-in-law and the man ofthe house, he intended to stand on his own efforts. Yes, Will was something the Lord had provided.

Pork had dug the grave the night before, close by Ellens grave, and he stood, spade in hand,behind the moist red clay he was soon to shovel back in place. Scarlett stood behind him in thepatchy shade of a gnarled low-limbed cedar, the hot sun of the June morning dappling her, andtried to keep her eyes away from the red trench in front of her. Jim Tarleton, little Hugh Munroe,Alex Fontaine and old man McRaes youngest grandson came slowly and awkwardly down thepath from the house bearing Geralds coffin on two lengths of split oak. Behind them, at arespectful distance, followed a large straggling crowd of neighbors and friends, shabbily dressed,silent. As they came down the sunny path through the garden, Pork bowed his head upon the top ofthe spade handle and cried; and Scarlett saw with incurious surprise that the kinks on his head, sojettily black when she went to Atlanta a few months before, were now grizzled.

She thanked God tiredly that she had cried all her tears the night before, so now she could standerect and dry eyed. The sound of Suellens tears, put back of her shoulder, irritated her unbearablyand she had to clench her fists to keep from turning and slapping the swollen face. Sue had beenthe cause of her fathers death, whether she intended it or not, and she should have the decency tocontrol herself in front of the hostile neighbors. Not a single person had spoken to her that morningor given her one look of sympathy. They had kissed Scarlett quietly, shaken her hand, murmuredkind words to Carreen and even to Pork but had looked through Suellen as if she were not there.

To them she had done worse than murder her father. She had tried to betray him into disloyalty to the South. And to that grim and close-knit community it was as if she had tried to betray thehonor of them all. She had broken the solid front the County presented to the world. By herattempt to get money from the Yankee government she had aligned herself with Carpetbaggers andScalawags, more hated enemies than the Yankee soldiers had ever been. She, a member of an oldand staunchly Confederate family, a planters family, had gone over to the enemy and by so doinghad brought shame on every family in the County.

The mourners were seething with indignation and downcast with sorrow, especially three ofthemold man McRae, who had been Geralds crony since he came to the up-country fromSavannah so many years before, Grandma Fontaine who loved him because he was Ellenshusband, and Mrs. Tarleton who had been closer to him than to any of her neighbors because, asshe often said, he was the only man in the County who knew a stallion from a gelding.

The sight of the stormy faces of these three in the dim parlor where Gerald lay before the funeralhad caused Ashley and Will some uneasiness and they had retired to Ellens office for aconsultation.

Some of them are goin to say somethin about Suellen, said Will abruptly, biting his straw inhalf. They think they got just cause to say somethin. Maybe they have. It aint for me to say. But,Ashley, whether theyre right or not, well have to resent it, bein the men of the family, and thentherell be trouble. Cant nobody do nothin with old man McRae because hes deaf as a post andcant hear folks tryin to shut him up. And you know there aint nobody in Gods world everstopped Grandma Fontaine from speakin her mind. And as for Mrs. Tarletondid you see her rollthem russet eyes of hers every time she looked at Sue? Shes got her ears laid back and canthardly wait. If they say somethin, we got to take it up and we got enough trouble at Tara nowwithout bein at outs with our neighbors.

Ashley sighed worriedly. He knew the tempers of his neighbors better than Will did and heremembered that fully half of the quarrels and some of the shootings of the days before the warhad risen from the County custom of saying a few words over the coffins of departed neighbors.

Generally the words were eulogistic in the extreme but occasionally they were not. Sometimes,words meant in the utmost respect were misconstrued by overstrung relatives of the dead andscarcely were the last shovels of earth mounded above the coffin before trouble began.

In the absence of a priest Ashley was to conduct the services with the aid of Carreens Book ofDevotions, the assistance of the Methodist and Baptist preachers of Jonesboro and Fayettevillehaving been tactfully refused. Carreen, more devoutly Catholic than her sisters, had been veryupset that Scarlett had neglected to bring a priest from Atlanta with her and had only been a littleeased by the reminder that when the priest came down to marry Will and Suellen, he could read theservices over Gerald. It was she who objected to the neighboring Protestant preachers and gave thematter into Ashleys hands, marking passages in her book for him to read. Ashley, leaning againstthe old secretary, knew that the responsibility for preventing trouble lay with him and, knowing thehair-trigger tempers of the County, was at a loss as to how to proceed.

Theres no help for it, Will, he said, rumpling his bright hair. I cant knock Grandma Fontainedown or old man McRae either, and I cant hold my hand over Mrs. Tarletons mouth. And themildest thing theyll say is that Suellen is a murderess and a traitor and but for her Mr. OHara would still be alive. Damn this custom of speaking over the dead. Its barbarous.

Look, Ash, said Will slowly. I aint aimin to have nobody say nothin against Suellen, nomatter what they think. You leave it to me. When youve finished with the readin and the prayin

and you say: If anyone would like to say a few words, you look right at me, so I can speak first.

But Scarlett, watching the pallbearers difficulty in getting the coffin through the narrowentrance into the burying ground, had no thought of trouble to come after the funeral. She wasthinking with a leaden heart that in burying Gerald she was burying one of the last links that joinedher to the old days of happiness and irresponsibility.

Finally the pallbearers set the coffin down near the grave and stood clenching and unclenchingtheir aching fingers. Ashley, Melanie and Will filed into the enclosure and stood behind the OHaragirls. All the closer neighbors who could crowd in were behind them and the others stood outsidethe brick wall. Scarlett, really seeing them for the first time, was surprised and touched by the sizeof the crowd. With transportation so limited it was kind of so many to come. There were fifty orsixty people there, some of them from so far away she wondered how they had heard in time tocome. There were whole families from Jonesboro and Fayetteville and Lovejoy and with them afew negro servants. Many small farmers from far across the river were present and Crackers fromthe backwoods and a scattering of swamp folk. The swamp men were lean bearded giants inhomespun, coon-skin caps on their heads, their rifles easy in the crooks of their arms, their wads oftobacco stilled in their cheeks. Their women were with them, their bare feet sunk in the soft redearth, their lower lips full of snuff. Their faces beneath their sun-bonnets were sallow and malarial-looking but shining clean and their freshly ironed calicoes glistened with starch.

The near neighbors were there in full force. Grandma Fontaine, withered, wrinkled and yellowas an old molted bird, was leaning on her cane, and behind her were Sally Munroe Fontaine andYoung Miss Fontaine. They were trying vainly by whispered pleas and jerks at her skirt to makethe old lady sit down on the brick wall. Grandmas husband, the Old Doctor, was not there. He haddied two months before and much of the bright malicious joy of life had gone from her old eyes.

Cathleen Calvert Hilton stood alone as befitted one whose husband had helped bring about thepresent tragedy, her faded sunbonnet hiding her bowed face. Scarlett saw with amazement that herpercale dress had grease spots on it and her hands were freckled and unclean. There were evenblack crescents under her fingernails. There was nothing of quality folks about Cathleen now. Shelooked Cracker, even worse. She looked poor white, shiftless, slovenly, trifling.

Shell be dipping snuff soon, if she isnt doing it already, thought Scarlett in horror. GoodLord! What a comedown!

She shuddered, turning her eyes from Cathleen as she realized how narrow was the chasmbetween quality folk and poor whites.

There but for a lot of gumption am I, she thought, and pride surged through her as she realizedthat she and Cathleen had started with the same equipment after the surrenderempty hands andwhat they had in their heads.

I havent done so bad, she thought, lifting her chin and smiling.

But she stopped in mid-smile as she saw the scandalized eyes of Mrs. Tarleton upon her. Her eyes were red-rimmed from tears and, after giving Scarlett a reproving look, she turned her gazeback to Suellen, a fierce angry gaze that boded ill for her. Behind her and her husband were thefour Tarleton girls, their red locks indecorous notes in the solemn occasion, their russet eyes stilllooking like the eyes of vital young animals, spirited and dangerous.

Feet were stilled, hats were removed, hands folded and skirts rustled into quietness as Ashleystepped forward with Carreens worn Book of Devotions in his hand. He stood for a momentlooking down, the sun glittering on his golden head. A deep silence fell on the crowd, so deep thatthe harsh whisper of the wind in the magnolia leaves came clear to their ears and the far-offrepetitious note of a mockingbird sounded unendurably loud and sad. Ashley began to read theprayers and all heads bowed as his resonant, beautifully modulated voice rolled out the brief anddignified words.

Oh! thought Scarlett, her throat constricting. How beautiful his voice is! If anyone has to dothis for Pa, Im glad its Ashley. Id rather have him than a priest. Id rather have Pa buried by oneof his own folks than a stranger.

When Ashley came to the part of the prayers concerning the souls in Purgatory, which Carreenhad marked for him to read, he abruptly closed the book. Only Carreen noticed the omission andlooked up puzzled, as he began the Lords Prayer. Ashley knew that half the people present hadnever heard of Purgatory and those who had would take it as a personal affront, if he insinuated,even in prayer, that so fine a man as Mr. OHara had not gone straight to Heaven. So, in deferenceto public opinion, he skipped all mention of Purgatory. The gathering joined heartily in the LordsPrayer but their voices trailed off into embarrassed silence when he began the Hail Mary. They hadnever heard that prayer and they looked furtively at each other as the OHara girls, Melanie and theTara servants gave the response: Pray for us, now and at the hour of our death. Amen.

Then Ashley raised his head and stood for a moment, uncertain. The eyes of the neighbors wereexpectantly upon him as they settled themselves in easier positions for a long harangue. They werewaiting for him to go on with the service, for it did not occur to any of them that he was at the endof the Catholic prayers. County funerals were always long. The Baptist and Methodist ministerswho performed them had no set prayers but extemporized as the circumstances demanded andseldom stopped before all mourners were in tears and the bereaved feminine relatives screamingwith grief. The neighbors would have been shocked, aggrieved and indignant, had these briefprayers been all the service over the body of their loved friend, and no one knew this better thanAshley. The matter would be discussed at dinner tables for weeks and the opinion of the Countywould be that the OHara girls had not shown proper respect for their father.

So he threw a quick apologetic glance at Carreen and, bowing his head again, began recitingfrom memory the Episcopal burial service which he had often read over slaves buried at TwelveOaks.

I am the Resurrection and the Life ... and whosoever ... believeth in Me shall never die.

It did not come back to him readily and he spoke slowly, occasionally falling silent for a spaceas he waited for phrases to rise from his memory. But this measured delivery made his words moreimpressive, and mourners who had been dry-eyed before began now to reach for handkerchiefs.

Sturdy Baptists and Methodists all, they thought it the Catholic ceremony and immediately rear ranged their first opinion that the Catholic services were cold and Popish. Scarlett and Suellenwere equally ignorant and thought the words comforting and beautiful. Only Melanie and Carreenrealized that a devoutly Catholic Irishman was being laid to rest by the Church of Englandsservice. And Carreen was too stunned by grief and her hurt at Ashleys treachery to interfere.

When he had finished, Ashley opened wide his sad gray eyes and looked about the crowd. Aftera pause, his eyes caught those of Will and he said: Is there anyone present who would like to say aword?

Mrs. Tarleton twitched nervously but before she could act, Will stumped forward and standing atthe head of the coffin began to speak.

Friends, he began in his flat voice, maybe you think Im gettin above myself, speakin firstme who never knew Mr. OHara till bout a year ago when you all have known him twentyyears or more. But this here is my excuse. If hed lived a month or so longer, Id have had the rightto call him Pa.

A startled ripple went over the crowd. They were too well bred to whisper but they shifted ontheir feet and stared at Carreens bowed head. Everyone knew his dumb devotion to her. Seeing thedirection in which all eyes were cast, Will went on as if he had taken no note.

So bein as how Im to marry Miss Suellen as soon as the priest comes down from Atlanta, Ithought maybe that gives me the right to speak first.

The last part of his speech was lost in a faint sibilant buzz that went through the gathering, anangry beelike buzz. There were indignation and disappointment in the sound. Everyone liked Will,everyone respected him for what he had done for Tara. Everyone knew his affections lay withCarreen, so the news that he was to marry the neighborhood pariah instead sat ill upon them. Goodold Will marrying that nasty, sneaking little Suellen OHara!

For a moment the air was tense. Mrs. Tarletons eyes began to snap and her lips to shapesoundless words. In the silence, old man McRaes high voice could be heard imploring hisgrandson to tell him what had been said. Will faced them all, still mild of face, but there was somethingin his pale blue eyes which dared them to say one word about his future wife. For a momentthe balance hung between the honest affection everyone had for Will and their contempt forSuellen. And Will won. He continued as if his pause had been a natural one.

I never knew Mr. OHara in his prime like you all done. All I knew personally was a fine oldgentleman who was a mite addled. But Ive heard tell from you all bout what he used to be like.

And I want to say this. He was a fightin Irishman and a Southern gentleman and as loyal aConfederate as ever lived. You cant get no better combination than that. And we aint likely to seemany more like him, because the times that bred men like him are as dead as he is. He was born ina furrin country but the man were buryin here today was more of a Georgian than any of usmournin him. He lived our life, he loved our land and, when you come right down to it, he diedfor our Cause, same as the soldiers did. He was one of us and he had our good points and our badpoints and he had our strength and he had our failins. He had our good points in that couldntnothin stop him when his mind was made up and he warnt scared of nothin that walked in shoeleather. There warnt nothin that come to him from the outside that could lick him.

He warnt scared of the English government when they wanted to hang him. He just lit out andleft home. And when he come to this country and was pore, that didnt scare him a mite neither. Hewent to work and he made his money. And he warnt scared to tackle this section when it was partwild and the Injuns had just been run out of it. He made a big plantation out of a wilderness. Andwhen the war come on and his money begun to go, he warnt scared to be pore again. And whenthe Yankees come through Tara and might of burnt him out or killed him, he warnt fazed a bit andhe warnt licked neither. He just planted his front feet and stood his ground. Thats why I say hehad our good points. There aint nothin from the outside can lick any of us.

But he had our failins too, cause he could be licked from the inside. I mean to say that whatthe whole world couldnt do, his own heart could. When Mrs. OHara died, his heart died too andhe was licked. And what we seen walking round here warnt him.

Will paused and his eyes went quietly around the circle of faces. The crowd stood in the hot sunas if enchanted to the ground and whatever wrath they had felt for Suellen was forgotten. Willseyes rested for a moment on Scarlett and they crinkled slightly at the corners as if he wereinwardly smiling comfort to her. Scarlett, who had been fighting back rising tears, did feelcomforted. Will was talking common sense instead of a lot of tootle about reunions in another andbetter world and submitting her will to Gods. And Scarlett had always found strength and comfortin common sense.

And I dont want none of you to think the less of him for breakin like he done. All you all andme, too, are like him. We got the same weakness and failin. There aint nothin that walks can lickus, any more than it could lick him, not Yankees nor Carpetbaggers nor hard times nor high taxesnor even downright starvation. But that weakness thats in our hearts can lick us in the time it takesto bat your eye. It aint always losin someone you love that does it, like it done Mr. OHara.

Everybodys mainspring is different. And I want to say thisfolks whose mainsprings are bustedare better dead. There aint no place for them in the world these days, and theyre happier bein

dead. ... Thats why Im sayin you all aint got no cause to grieve for Mr. OHara now. The time togrieve was back when Sherman come through and he lost Mrs. OHara. Now that his bodys goneto join his heart, I dont see that we got reason to mourn, unless were pretty damned selfish, andIm sayin it who loved him like he was my own pa. ... There wont be no more words said, if youfolks dont mind. The family is too cut up to listen and it wouldnt be no kindness to them.

Will stopped and, turning to Mrs. Tarleton, he said in a lower voice: I wonder couldnt you takeScarlett in the house, Mam? It aint right for her to be standin in the sun so long. And GrandmaFontaine dont look any too peart neither, meanin no disrespect,

Startled at the abrupt switching from the eulogy to herself, Scarlett went red with embarrassmentas all eyes turned toward her. Why should Will advertise her already obvious pregnancy? She gavehim a shamed indignant look, but Wills placid gaze bore her down.

Please, his look said. I know what Im doin.

Already he was the man of the house and, not wishing to make a scene, Scarlett turnedhelplessly to Mrs. Tarleton. That lady, suddenly diverted, as Will had intended, from thoughts ofSuellen to the always fascinating matter of breeding, be it animal or human, took Scarletts arm.

Come in the house, honey.

Her face took on a look of kind, absorbed interest and Scarlett suffered herself to be led throughthe crowd that gave way and made a narrow path for her. There was a sympathetic murmuring asshe passed and several hands went out to pat her comfortingly. When she came abreast GrandmaFontaine, the old lady put out a skinny claw and said: Give me your arm, child, and added with afierce glance at Sally and Young Miss: No, dont you come. I dont want you.

They passed slowly through the crowd which closed behind them and went up the shady pathtoward the house, Mrs. Tarletons eager helping hand so strong under Scarletts elbow that she wasalmost lifted from the ground at each step.

Now, why did Will do that? cried Scarlett heatedly, when they were out of earshot. Hepractically said: Look at her! Shes going to have a baby!

Well, sakes alive, you are, arent you? said Mrs. Tarleton. Will did right It was foolish ofyou to stand in the hot sun when you might have fainted and had a miscarriage.

Will wasnt bothered about her miscarrying, said Grandma, a little breathless as she laboredacross the front yard toward the steps. There was a grim, knowing smile on her face. Wills smart.

He didnt want either you or me, Beetrice, at the graveside. He was scared of what wed say and heknew this was the only way to get rid of us. ... And it was more than that. He didnt want Scarlettto hear the clods dropping on the coffin. And hes right. Just remember, Scarlett, as long as youdont hear that sound, folks arent actually dead to you. But once you hear it ... Well, its the mostdreadfully final sound in the world. ... Help me up the steps, child, and give me a hand, Beetrice.

Scarlett dont any more need your arm than she needs crutches and Im not so peart, as Will observed.

... Will knew you were your fathers pet and he didnt want to make it worse for you than italready was. He figured it wouldnt be so bad for your sisters. Suellen has her shame to sustain herand Carreen her God. But youve got nothing to sustain you, have you, child?

No, answered Scarlett, helping the old lady up the Steps, faintly surprised at the truth thatsounded in the reedy old voice. Ive never had anything to sustain meexcept Mother.

But when you lost her, you found you could stand alone, didnt you? Well, some folks cant.

Your pa was one. Wills right. Dont you grieve. He couldnt get along without Ellen and heshappier where he is. Just like Ill be happier when I join the Old Doctor.

She spoke without any desire for sympathy and the two gave her none. She spoke as briskly andnaturally as if her husband were alive and in Jonesboro and a short buggy ride would bring themtogether. Grandma was too old and had seen too much to fear death.

Butyou can stand alone too, said Scarlett.

Yes, but its powerful uncomfortable at times.

Look here, Grandma, interrupted Mrs. Tarleton, you ought not to talk to Scarlett like that.

Shes upset enough already. What with her trip down here and that tight dress and her grief and theheat, shes got enough to make her miscarry without your adding to it, talking grief and sorrow.

Gods nightgown! cried Scarlett in irritation. Im not upset! And Im not one of those sicklymiscarrying fools!

You never can tell, said Mrs. Tarleton omnisciently. I lost my first when I saw a bull gore oneof our darkies andyou remember my red mare, Nellie? Now, there was the healthiest-lookingmare you ever saw but she was nervous and high strung and if I didnt watch her, shed

Beatrice, hush, said Grandma. Scarlett wouldnt miscarry on a bet. Lets us sit here in thehall where its cool. Theres a nice draft through here. Now, you go fetch us a glass of buttermilk,Beetrice, if theres any in the kitchen. Or look in the pantry and see if theres any wine. I could dowith a glass. Well sit here till the folks come up to say good-by.

Scarlett ought to be in bed, insisted Mrs. Tarleton, running her eyes over her with the expertair of one who calculated a pregnancy to the last-minute of its length.

Get going, said Grandma, giving her a prod with her cane, and Mrs. Tarleton went toward thekitchen, throwing her hat carelessly on the sideboard and running her hands through her damp redhair.

Scarlett lay back in her chair and unbuttoned the two top buttons of her tight basque, it was cooland dim in the high-ceilinged hall and the vagrant draft that went from back to front of the housewas refreshing after the heat of the sun. She looked across the hall into the parlor where Gerald hadlain and, wrenching her thoughts from him, looked up at the portrait of Grandma Robillardhanging above the fireplace. The bayonet-scarred portrait with its high-piled hair, half-exposedbreasts and cool insolence had, as always, a tonic effect upon her.

I dont know which hit Beetrice Tarleton worse, losing her boys or her horses, said GrandmaFontaine. She never did pay much mind to Jim or her girls, you know. Shes one of those folksWill was talking about. Her mainsprings busted. Sometimes I wonder if she wont go the wayyour pa went. She wasnt ever happy unless horses or humans were breeding right in her face andnone of her girls are married or got any prospects of catching husbands in this county, so shes gotnothing to occupy her mind. If she wasnt such a lady at heart, shed be downright common. ...

Was Will telling the truth about marrying Suellen?

Yes, said Scarlett, looking the old lady full in the eye. Goodness, she could remember the timewhen she was scared to death of Grandma Fontaine! Well, shed grown up since then and shedjust as soon as not tell her to go to the devil if she meddled in affairs at Tara.

He could do better, said Grandma candidly.

Indeed? said Scarlett haughtily.

Come off your high horse, Miss, said the old lady tartly. I shant attack your precious sister,though I might have if Id stayed at the burying ground. What I mean is with the scarcity of men inthe neighborhood, Will could marry most any of the girls. Theres Beatrices four wild cats and theMunroe girls and the McRae

Hes going to marry Sue and thats that.

Shes lucky to get him.

Tara is lucky to get him.

You love this place, dont you?

Yes.

So much that you dont mind your sister marrying out of her class as long as you have a manaround to care for Tara?

Class? said Scarlett, startled at the idea. Class? What does class matter now, so long as a girlgets a husband who can take care of her?

Thats a debatable question, said Old Miss. Some folks would say you were talking commonsense. Others would say you were letting down bars that ought never be lowered one inch. Willscertainly not quality folks and some of your people were.

Her sharp old eyes went to the portrait of Grandma Robillard.

Scarlett thought of Will, lank, unimpressive, mild, eternally chewing a straw, his wholeappearance deceptively devoid of energy, like that of most Crackers. He did not have behind him along line of ancestors of wealth, prominence and blood. The first of Wills family to set foot onGeorgia soil might even have been one of Oglethorpes debtors or a bond servant. Will had notbeen to college. In fact, four years in a backwoods school was all the education he had ever had.

He was honest and he was loyal, he was patient and he was hard working, but certainly he was notquality. Undoubtedly by Robillard standards, Suellen was coming down in the world.

So you approve of Will coming into your family?

Yes, answered Scarlett fiercely, ready to pounce upon the old lady at the first words ofcondemnation.

You may kiss me, said Grandma surprisingly, and she smiled in her most approving manner.

I never liked you much till now, Scarlett. You were always hard as a hickory nut, even as a child,and I dont like hard females, barring myself. But I do like the way you meet things. You dontmake a fuss about things that cant be helped, even if they are disagreeable. You take your fencescleanly like a good hunter.

Scarlett smiled uncertainly and pecked obediently at the withered cheek presented to her. It waspleasant to hear approving words again, even if she had little idea what they meant.

Theres plenty of folks hereabouts wholl have something to say about you letting Sue marry aCrackerfor all that everybody likes Will. Theyll say in one breath what a fine man he is andhow terrible it is for an OHara girl to marry beneath her. But dont you let it bother you.

Ive never bothered about what people said.

So Ive heard. There was a hint of acid in the old voice. Well, dont bother about what folkssay. Itll probably be a very successful marriage. Of course, Wills always going to look like aCracker and marriage wont improve his grammar any. And, even if he makes a mint of money,hell never lend any shine and sparkle to Tara, like your father did. Crackers are short on sparkle.

But Wills a gentleman at heart. Hes got the right instincts. Nobody but a born gentleman couldhave put his finger on what is wrong with us as accurately as he just did, down there at theburying. The whole world cant lick us but we can lick ourselves by longing too hard for things wehavent got any moreand by remembering too much. Yes, Will will do well by Suellen and byTara.

Then you approve of me letting him marry her?

God, no! The old voice was tired and bitter but vigorous. Approve of Crackers marrying intoold families? Bah! Would I approve of breeding scrub stock to thoroughbreds? Oh, Crackers aregood and solid and honest but

But you said you thought it would be a successful match! cried Scarlett bewildered.

Oh, I think its good for Suellen to marry Willto marry anybody for that matter, because sheneeds a husband bad. And where else could she get one? And where else could you get as good amanager for Tara? But that doesnt mean I like the situation any better than you do.

But I do like it, thought Scarlett trying to grasp the old ladys meaning. Im glad Will is going tomarry her. Why should she think I minded? Shes taking it for granted that I do mind, just like her.

She felt puzzled and a little ashamed, as always when people attributed to her emotions andmotives they possessed and thought she shared.

Grandma fanned herself with her palmetto leaf and went on briskly: I dont approve of thematch any more than you do but Im practical and so are you. And when it comes to somethingthats unpleasant but cant be helped, I dont see any sense in screaming and kicking about it.

Thats no way to meet the ups and downs of life. I know because my family and the Old Doctorsfamily have had more than our share of ups and downs. And if we folks have a motto, its this:

Dont hollersmile and bide your time. Weve survived a passel of things that way, smiling andbiding our time, and weve gotten to be experts at surviving. We had to be. Weve always bet onthe wrong horses. Run out of France with the Huguenots, run out of England with the Cavaliers,run out of Scotland with Bonnie Prince Charlie, run out of Haiti by the niggers and now licked bythe Yankees. But we always turn up on top in a few years. You know why?

She cocked her head and Scarlett thought she looked like nothing so much as an old, knowingparrot.

No, I dont know, Im sure, she answered politely. But she was heartily bored, even as she hadbeen the day when Grandma launched on her memories of the Creek uprising.

Well, this is the reason. We bow to the inevitable. Were not wheat, were buckwheat! When astorm comes along it flattens ripe wheat because its dry and cant bend with the wind. But ripebuckwheats got sap in it and it bends. And when the wind has passed, it springs up almost asstraight and strong as before. We arent a stiff-necked tribe. Were mighty limber when a hardwinds blowing, because we know it pays to be limber. When trouble comes we bow to theinevitable without any mouthing, and we work and we smile and we bide our time. And we playalong with lesser folks and we take what we can get from them. And when were strong enough,we kick the folks whose necks weve climbed over. That, my child, is the secret of the survival.

And after a pause, she added: I pass it on to you.

The old lady cackled, as if she were amused by her words, despite the venom in them. Shelooked as if she expected some comment from Scarlett but the words had made little sense to herand she could think of nothing to say.

No, sir, Old Miss went on, our folks get flattened out but they rise up again, and thats more than I can say for plenty of people not so far away from here. Look at Cathleen Calvert. You cansee what shes come to. Poor white! And a heap lower than the man she married. Look at theMcRae family. Flat to the ground, helpless, dont know what to do, dont know how to doanything. Wont even try. They spend their time whining about the good old days. And look atwell, look at nearly anybody in this County except my Alex and my Sally and you and JimTarleton and his girls and some others. The rest have gone under because they didnt have any sapin them, because they didnt have the gumption to rise up again. There never was anything to thosefolks but money and darkies, and now that the money and darkies are gone, those folks will beCracker in another generation.

You forgot the Wilkes.

No, I didnt forget them. I just thought Id be polite and not mention them, seeing that Ashleysa guest under this roof. But seeing as how youve brought up their nameslook at them! TheresIndia who from all I hear is a dried-up old maid already, giving herself all kinds of widowed airsbecause Stu Tarleton was killed and not making any effort to forget him and try to catch anotherman. Of course, shes old but she could catch some widower with a big family if she tried. Andpoor Honey was always a man-crazy fool with no more sense than a guinea hen. And as forAshley, look at him!

Ashley is a very fine man, began Scarlett hotly.

I never said he wasnt but hes as helpless as a turtle on his back. If the Wilkes family pullsthrough these hard times, itll be Melly who pulls them through. Not Ashley.

Melly! Lord, Grandma! What are you talking about? Ive lived with Melly long enough toknow shes sickly and scared and hasnt the gumption to say Boo to a goose.

Now why on earth should anyone want to say Boo to a goose? It always sounded like a wasteof time to me. She might not say Boo to a goose but shed say Boo to the world or the Yankeegovernment or anything else that threatened her precious Ashley or her boy or her notions ofgentility. Her way isnt your way, Scarlett, or my way. Its the way your mother would have actedif shed lived. Melly puts me in mind of your mother when she was young. ... And maybe shellpull the Wilkes family through.

Oh, Mellys a well-meaning little ninny. But you are very unjust to Ashley. Hes

Oh, foot! Ashley was bred to read books and nothing else. That doesnt help a man pull himselfout of a tough fix, like were all in now. From what I hear, hes the worst plow hand in the County!

Now you just compare him with my Alex! Before the war, Alex was the most worthless dandy inthe world and he never had a thought beyond a new cravat and getting drunk and shootingsomebody and chasing girls who were no better than they should be. But look at him now! Helearned farming because he had to learn. Hed have starved and so would all of us. Now he raisesthe best cotton in the Countyyes, Miss! Its a heap better than Tara cotton!and he knows whatto do with hogs and chickens. Ha! Hes a fine boy for all his bad temper. He knows how to bide histime and change with changing ways and when all this Reconstruction misery is over, youre goingto see my Alex as rich a man as his father and his grandfather were. But Ashley

Scarlett was smarting at the slight to Ashley.

It all sounds like tootle to me, she said coldly.

Well, it shouldnt, said Grandma, fastening a sharp eye upon her. For its just exactly thecourse youve been following since you went to Atlanta. Oh, yes! We hear of your didoes, even ifwe are buried down here in the country. Youve changed with the changing times too. We hear howyou suck up to the Yankees and the white trash and the new-rich Carpetbaggers to get money outof them. Butter doesnt melt in your mouth from all I can hear. Well, go to it, I say. And get everycent out of them you can, but when youve got enough money, kick them in the face, because theycant serve you any longer. Be sure you do that and do it properly, for trash hanging onto your coattails can ruin you.

Scarlett looked at her, her brow wrinkling with the effort to digest the words. They still didntmake much sense and she was still angry at Ashley being called a turtle on his back.

I think youre wrong about Ashley, she said abruptly.

Scarlett, you just arent smart.

Thats your opinion, said Scarlett rudely, wishing it were permissible to smack old ladies

jaws.

Oh, youre smart enough about dollars and cents. Thats a mans way of being smart. But youarent smart at all like a woman. You arent a speck smart about folks.

Scarletts eyes began to snap fire and her hands to clench and unclench.

Ive made you good and mad, havent I? asked the old lady, smiling. Well, I aimed to do justthat.

Oh, you did, did you? And why, pray?

I had good and plenty reasons.

Grandma sank back in her chair and Scarlett suddenly realized that she looked very tired andincredibly old. The tiny clawlike hands folded over the fan were yellow and waxy as a deadpersons. The anger went out of Scarletts heart as a thought came to her. She leaned over and tookone of the hands in hers.

Youre a mighty sweet old liar, she said. You didnt mean a word of all this rigmarole.

Youve just been talking to keep my mind off Pa, havent you?

Dont fiddle with me! said Old Miss grumpily, Jerking away her hand. Partly for that reason,partly because what Ive been telling you is the truth and youre just too stupid to realize it.

But she smiled a little and took the sting from her words. Scarletts heart emptied itself of wrathabout Ashley. It was nice to know Grandma hadnt meant any of it.

Thank you, just the same. It was nice of you to talk to meand Im glad to know youre withme about Will and Suellen, even ifeven if a lot of other people do disapprove.

Mrs. Tarleton came down the hall, carrying two glasses of buttermilk. She did all domesticthings badly and the glasses were slopping over.

I had to go clear to the spring house to get it, she said. Drink it quick because the folks are coming up from the burying ground. Scarlett, are you really going to let Suellen marry Will? Notthat he isnt a sight too good for her but you know he is a Cracker and

Scarletts eyes met those of Grandma. There was a wicked sparkle in the old eyes that found ananswer in her own.

Chapter 41

WHEN THE LAST GOOD-BY had been said and the last sound of wheels and hooves diedaway, Scarlett went into Ellens office and removed a gleaming object from where she had hiddenit the night before between the yellowed papers in the pigeon-holes of the secretary. Hearing Porksniffling in the dining room as he went about laying the table for dinner she called to him. He cameto her, his black face as forlorn as a lost and masterless hound.

Pork, she said sternly, you cry just once more and IllIll cry, too. Youve got to stop.

Yasm. Ah try but evey time Ah try Ah thinks of Mist Gerald an

Well, dont think. I can stand everybody elses tears but not yours. There. she broke off gently,dont you see? I cant stand yours because I know how you loved him. Blow your nose, Pork. Ivegot a present for you.

A little interest flickered in Porks eyes as he blew his nose loudly but it was more politenessthan interest.

You remember that night you got shot robbing somebodys hen house?

Lawd Gawd, Miss Scarlett! Ah ain never

Well, you did, so dont lie to me about it at this late date. You remember I said I was going togive you a watch for being so faithful?

Yasm, Ah members. Ah figgered youd done fergot.

No, I didnt forget and here it is.

She held out for him a massive gold watch, heavily embossed, from which dangled a chain withmany fobs and seals.

Fo Gawd, Miss Scarlett! cried Pork. Dats Mist Geralds watch! Ah done seen him look atdat watch a milyun times!

Yes, its Pas watch, Pork, and Im giving it to you. Take it.

Oh, nom! Pork retreated in horror. Dats a wite gempmums watch an Mist Geralds terboot. Huccome you talk bout givin it ter me, Miss Scarlett? Dat watch belong by rights ter lilWade Hampton.

It belongs to you. What did Wade Hampton ever do for Pa? Did he look after him when he wassick and feeble? Did he bathe him and dress him and shave him? Did he stick by him when theYankees came? Did he steal for him? Dont be a fool, Pork. If ever anyone deserved a watch, youdo, and I know Pa would approve. Here.

She picked up the black hand and laid the watch in the palm. Pork gazed at it reverently andslowly delight spread over his face.

Fer me, truly, Miss Scarlett?

Yes, indeed.

Wellmthankee, Mam.

Would you like for me to take it to Atlanta and have it engraved?

Whuts dis engrabed mean? Porks voice was suspicious.

It means to put writing on the back of it, likelike To Pork from the OHarasWell donegood and faithful servant.

Nomthankee. Mam. Never mind de engrabin. Pork retreated a step, clutching the watchfirmly.

A little smile twitched her lips.

Whats the matter, Pork? Dont you trust me to bring it back?

Yasm, Ah truses youonly, wellm, you mout change yo mind.

I wouldnt do that.

Wellm, you mout sell it. Ah spec its wuth a heap.

Do you think Id sell Pas watch?

Yasmef you needed de money.

You ought to be beat for that, Pork. Ive a mind to take the watch back.

Nom, you ain! The first faint smile of the day showed on Porks grief-worn face. Ah knowsyou An Miss Scarlett

Yes, Pork?

Ef you wuz jes half as nice ter wite folks as you is ter niggers, Ah spec de worl would treatyou better.

It treats me well enough, she said. Now, go find Mr. Ashley and tell him I want to see himhere, right away.

Ashley sat on Ellens little writing chair, his long body dwarfing the frail bit of furniture whileScarlett offered him a half-interest in the mill. Not once did his eyes meet hers and he spoke noword of interruption. He sat looking down at his hands, turning them over slowly, inspecting firstpalms and then backs, as though he had never seen them before. Despite hard work, they were stillslender and sensitive looking and remarkably well tended for a farmers hands.

His bowed head and silence disturbed her a little and she redoubled her efforts to make the millsound attractive. She brought to bear, too, all the charm of smile and glance she possessed but theywere wasted, for he did not raise his eyes. If he would only look at her! She made no mention ofthe information Will had given her of Ashleys determination to go North and spoke with the outward assumption that no obstacle stood in the way of his agreement with her plan. Still he didnot speak and finally, her words trailed into silence. There was a determined squareness about hisslender shoulders that alarmed her. Surely he wouldnt refuse! What earthly reason could he havefor refusing?

Ashley, she began again and paused. She had not intended using her pregnancy as anargument, had shrunk from the thought of Ashley even seeing her so bloated and ugly, but as herother persuasions seemed to have made no impression, she decided to use it and her helplessnessas a last card.

You must come to Atlanta. I do need your help so badly now, because I cant look after themills. It may be months before I can becauseyou seewell, because ...

Please! he said roughly. Good God, Scarlett!

He rose and went abruptly to the window and stood with his back to her, watching the solemnsingle file of ducks parade across the barnyard.

Is thatis that why you wont look at me? she questioned forlornly. I know I look

He swung around in a flash and his gray eyes met hers with an intensity that made her hands goto her throat.

Damn your looks! he said with a swift violence. You know you always look beautiful to me.

Happiness flooded her until her eyes were liquid with tears.

How sweet of you to say that! For I was so ashamed to let you see me

You ashamed? Why should you be ashamed? Im the one to feel shame and I do. If it hadntbeen for my stupidity you wouldnt be in this fix. Youd never have married Frank. I should neverhave let you leave Tara last winter. Oh, fool that I was! I should have known youknown youwere desperate, so desperate that youdI should haveI should have His face went haggard.

Scarletts heart beat wildly. He was regretting that he had not run away with her!

The least I could have done was go out and commit highway robbery or murder to get the taxmoney for you when you had taken us in as beggars. Oh, I messed it up all the way around!

Her heart contracted with disappointment and some of the happiness went from her, for thesewere not the words she hoped to hear.

I would have gone anyway, she said tiredly. I couldnt have let you do anything like that. Andanyway, its done now.

Yes, its done now, he said with slow bitterness. You wouldnt have let me do anythingdishonorable but you would sell yourself to a man you didnt loveand bear his child, so that myfamily and I wouldnt starve. It was kind of you to shelter my helplessness.

The edge in his voice spoke of a raw, unhealed wound that ached within him and his wordsbrought shame to her eyes. He was swift to see it and his face changed to gentleness.

You didnt think I was blaming you? Dear God, Scarlett! No. You are the bravest woman Iveever known. Its myself Im blaming.

He turned and looked out of the window again and the shoulders presented to her gaze did notlook quite so square. Scarlett waited a long moment in silence, hoping that Ashley would return tothe mood in which he spoke of her beauty, hoping he would say more words that she couldtreasure. It had been so long since she had seen him and she had lived on memories until they wereworn thin. She knew he still loved her. That fact was evident, in every line of him, in every bitter,self-condemnatory word, in his resentment at her bearing Franks child. She so longed to hear himsay it in words, longed to speak words herself that would provoke a confession, but she dared not.

She remembered her promise given last winter in the orchard, that she would never again throwherself at his head. Sadly she knew that promise must be kept if Ashley were to remain near her.

One cry from her of love and longing, one look that pleaded for his arms, and the matter would besettled forever. Ashley would surely go to New York. And he must not go away.

Oh, Ashley, dont blame yourself! How could it be your fault? You will come to Atlanta andhelp me, wont you?

No.

But, Ashley, her voice was beginning to break with anguish and disappointment, But Idcounted on you. I do need you so. Frank cant help me. Hes so busy with the store and if you dontcome I dont know where I can get a man! Everybody in Atlanta who is smart is busy with his ownaffairs and the others are so incompetent and

Its no use, Scarlett.

You mean youd rather go to New York and live among Yankees than come to Atlanta?

Who told you that? He turned and faced her, faint annoyance wrinkling his forehead.

Will.

Yes, Ive decided to go North. An old friend who made the Grand Tour with me before the warhas offered me a position in his fathers bank. Its better so, Scarlett. Id be no good to you. I knownothing of the lumber business.

But you know less about banking and its much harder! And I know Id make far moreallowances for your inexperience than Yankees would!

He winced and she knew she had said the wrong thing. He turned and looked out of the windowagain.

I dont want allowances made for me. I want to stand on my own feet for what Im worth.

What have I done with my life, up till now? Its time I made something of myselfor went downthrough my own fault. Ive been your pensioner too long already.

But Im offering you a half-interest in the mill, Ashley! You would be standing on your ownfeet becauseyou see, it would be your own business.

It would amount to the same thing. Id not be buying the half-interest Id be taking it as a giftAnd Ive taken too many gifts from you already, Scarlettfood and shelter and even clothes formyself and Melanie and the baby. And Ive given you nothing in return.

Oh, but you have! Will couldnt have

I can split kindling very nicely now.

Oh, Ashley! she cried despairingly, tears in her eyes at the jeering note in his voice. What hashappened to you since Ive been gone? You sound so hard and bitter! You didnt used to be thisway.

Whats happened? A very remarkable thing, Scarlett. Ive been thinking. I dont believe I reallythought from the time of the surrender until you went away from here. I was in a state ofsuspended animation and it was enough that I had something to eat and a bed to lie on. But whenyou went to Atlanta, shouldering a mans burden, I saw myself as much less than a manmuchless, indeed, than a woman. Such thoughts arent pleasant to live with and I do not intend to livewith them any longer. Other men came out of the war with less than I had, and look at them now.

So Im going to New York.

ButI dont understand! If its work you want, why wont Atlanta do as well as New York?

And my mill

No, Scarlett This is my last chance. Ill go North. If I go to Atlanta and work for you, Im lostforever.

The word lostlostlost dinged frighteningly in her heart like a death bell sounding. Hereyes went quickly to his but they were wide and crystal gray and they were looking through herand beyond her at some fate she could not see, could not understand.

Lost? Do you meanhave you done something the Atlanta Yankees can get you for? I mean,about helping Tony get away oror Oh, Ashley, you arent in the Ku Klux, are you?

His remote eyes came back to her swiftly and he smiled a brief smile that never reached hiseyes.

I had forgotten you were so literal. No, its not the Yankees Im afraid of. I mean if I go toAtlanta and take help from you again, I bury forever any hope of ever standing alone.

Oh, she sighed in quick relief, if its only that!

Yes, and he smiled again, the smile more wintry than before. Only that. Only my masculinepride, my self-respect and, if you choose to so call it, my immortal soul.

But, she swung around on another tack, you could gradually buy the mill from me and itwould be your own and then

Scarlett, he interrupted fiercely, I tell you, no! There are other reasons.

What reasons?

You know my reasons better than anyone in the world.

Ohthat? Butthatll be all right, she assured swiftly. I promised, you know, out in theorchard, last winter and Ill keep my promise and

Then you are surer of yourself than I am. I could not count on myself to keep such a promise. Ishould not have said that but I had to make you understand. Scarlett, I will not talk of this anymore. Its finished. When Will and Suellen marry, I am going to New York.

His eyes, wide and stormy, met hers for an instant and then he went swiftly across the room. Hishand was on the door knob. Scarlett stared at him in agony. The interview was ended and she hadlost. Suddenly weak from the strain and sorrow of the last day and the present disappointment, hernerves broke abruptly and she screamed: Oh, Ashley! And, flinging herself down on the saggingsofa, she burst into wild crying.

She heard his uncertain footsteps leaving the door and his helpless voice saying-her name overand over above her head. There was a swift pattering of feet racing up the hall from the kitchen andMelanie burst into the room, her eyes wide with alarm.

Scarlett ... the baby isnt ... ?

Scarlett burrowed her head in the dusty upholstery and screamed again.

Ashleyhes so mean! So doggoned meanso hateful!

Oh, Ashley, what have you done to her? Melanie threw herself on the floor beside the sofa andgathered Scarlett into her arms. What have you said? How could you! You might bring on thebaby! There, my darling, put your head on Melanies shoulder! What is wrong?

Ashleyhes soso bullheaded and hateful!

Ashley, Im surprised at you! Upsetting her so much and in her condition and Mr. OHarahardly in his grave!

Dont you fuss at him! cried Scarlett illogically, raising her head abruptly from Melaniesshoulder, her coarse black hair tumbling out from its net and her face streaked with tears. Hes gota right to do as he pleases!

Melanie, said Ashley, his face white, let me explain. Scarlett was kind enough to offer me aposition in Atlanta as manager of one of her mills

Manager! cried Scarlett indignantly. I offered him a half-interest and he

And I told her I had already made arrangements for us to go North and she

Oh, cried Scarlett, beginning to sob again, I told him and told him how much I needed himhow I couldnt get anybody to manage the millhow I was going to have this babyand herefused to come! And nownow, Ill have to sell the mill and I know I cant get anything like agood price for it and Ill lose money and I guess maybe well starve, but he wont care. Hes somean!

She burrowed her head back into Melanies thin shoulder and some of the real anguish wentfrom her as a flicker of hope woke in her. She could sense that in Melanies devoted heart she hadan ally, feel Melanies indignation that anyone, even her beloved husband, should make Scarlettcry. Melanie flew at Ashley like a small determined dove and pecked him for the first time in herlife.

Ashley, how could you refuse her? And after all shes done for us! How ungrateful you makeus appear! And she so helpless now with the bab How unchivalrous of you! She helped us whenwe needed help and now you deny her when she needs you!

Scarlett peeped slyly at Ashley and saw surprise and uncertainty plain in his face as he looked into Melanies dark indignant eyes. Scarlett was surprised, too, at the vigor of Melanies attack, forshe knew Melanie considered her husband beyond wifely reproaches and thought his decisionssecond only to Gods.

Melanie ... he began and then threw out his hands helplessly.

Ashley, how can you hesitate? Think what shes done for usfor me! Id have died in Atlantawhen Beau came if it hadnt been for her! And sheyes, she killed a Yankee, defending us. Didyou know that? She killed a man for us. And she worked and slaved before you and Will camehome, just to keep food in our mouths. And when I think of her plowing and picking cotton, Icould just Oh, my darling! And she swooped her head and kissed Scarletts tumbled hair infierce loyalty. And now the first time she asks us to do something for her

You dont need to tell me what she has done for us.

And Ashley, just think! Besides helping her, just think what itll mean for us to live in Atlantaamong our own people and not have to live with Yankees! Therell be Auntie and Uncle Henry andall our friends, and Beau can have lots of playmates and go to school. If we went North, wecouldnt let him go to school and associate with Yankee children and have pickaninnies in hisclass! Wed have to have a governess and I dont see how wed afford

Melanie, said Ashley and his voice was deadly quiet, do you really want to go to Atlanta sobadly? You never said so when we talked about going to New York. You never intimated

Oh, but when we talked about going to New York, I thought there was nothing for you inAtlanta and, besides, it wasnt my place to say anything. Its a wifes duty to go where her husbandgoes. But now that Scarlett needs us so and has a position that only you can fill we can go home!

Home! Her voice was rapturous as she squeezed Scarlett. And Ill see Five Points again andPeachtree road and and Oh, how Ive missed them all! And maybe we could have a littlehome of our own! I wouldnt care how little and tacky it was buta home of our own!

Her eyes blazed with enthusiasm and happiness and the two stared at her, Ashley with a queerstunned look, Scarlett with surprise mingled with shame. It had never occurred to her that Melaniemissed Atlanta so much and longed to be back, longed for a home of her own. She had seemed socontented at Tara it came to Scarlett as a shock that she was homesick.

Oh Scarlett, how good of you to plan all this for us! You knew how I longed for home!

As usual when confronted by Melanies habit of attributing worthy motives where no worthexisted, Scarlett was ashamed and irritated, and suddenly she could not meet either Ashleys orMelanies eyes.

We could get a little house of our own. Do you realize that weve been married five years andnever had a home?

You can stay with us at Aunt Pittys. Thats your home, mumbled Scarlett, toying with apillow and keeping her eyes down to hide dawning triumph in them as she felt the tide turning herway.

No, but thank you just the same, darling. That would crowd us so. Well get a house Oh,Ashley, do say Yes!

Scarlett, said Ashley and his voice was toneless, look at me.

Startled, she looked up and met gray eyes that were bitter and full of tired futility.

Scarlett, I will come to Atlanta. ... I cannot fight you both.

He turned and walked out of the room. Some of the triumph in her heart was dulled by anagging fear. The look in his eyes when he spoke had been the same as when he said he would belost forever if he came to Atlanta.

After Suellen and Will married and Carreen went off to Charleston to the convent, Ashley,Melanie and Beau came to Atlanta, bringing Dilcey with them to cook and nurse. Prissy and Porkwere left at Tara until such a time as Will could get other darkies to help him in the fields and thenthey, too, would come to town.

The little brick house that Ashley took for his family was on Ivy Street directly behind AuntPittys house and the two back yards ran together, divided only by a ragged overgrown privethedge. Melanie had chosen it especially for this reason. She said, on the first morning of her returnto Atlanta as she laughed and cried and embraced Scarlett and Aunt Pitty, she had been separatedfrom her loved ones for so long that she could never be close enough to them again.

The house had originally been two stories high but the upper floor had been destroyed by shellsduring the siege and the owner, returning after the surrender, had lacked the money to replace it.

He had contented himself with putting a flat roof on the remaining first floor which gave thebuilding the squat, disproportionate look of a childs playhouse built of shoe boxes. The house washigh from the ground, built over a large cellar, and the long sweeping flight of stairs which reachedit made it look slightly ridiculous. But the flat, squashed look of the place was partly redeemed bythe two fine old oaks which shaded it and a dusty-leaved magnolia, splotched with white blossoms,standing beside the front steps. The lawn was wide and green with thick clover and bordering itwas a straggling, unkempt privet hedge, interlaced with sweet-smelling honeysuckle vines. Hereand there in the grass, roses threw out sprangles from crushed old stems and pink and white crpemyrtle bloomed as valiantly as if war had not passed over their heads and Yankee horses gnawedtheir boughs.

Scarlett thought it quite the ugliest dwelling she had ever seen but, to Melanie, Twelve Oaks inall its grandeur had not been more beautiful. It was home and she and Ashley and Beau were at lasttogether under their own roof.

India Wilkes came back from Macon, where she and Honey had lived since 1864, and took upher residence with her brother, crowding the occupants of the little house. But Ashley and Melaniewelcomed her. Times had changed, money was scarce, but nothing had altered the rule of Southernlife that families always made room gladly for indigent or unmarried female relatives.

Honey had married and, so India said, married beneath her, a coarse Westerner from Mississippiwho had settled in Macon. He had a red face and a loud voice and jolly ways. India had notapproved of the match and, not approving, had not been happy in her brother-in-laws home. Shewelcomed the news that Ashley now had a home of his own, so she could remove herself fromuncongenial surroundings and also from the distressing sight of her sister so fatuously happy with a man unworthy of her.

The rest of the family privately thought that the giggling and simple-minded Honey had done farbetter than could be expected and they marveled that she had caught any man. Her husband was agentleman and a man of some means; but to India, born in Georgia and reared in Virginiatraditions, anyone not from the eastern seaboard was a boor and a barbarian. Probably Honeyshusband was as happy to be relieved of her company as she was to leave him, for India was noteasy to live with these days.

The mantle of spinsterhood was definitely on her shoulders now. She was twenty-five andlooked it, and so there was no longer any need for her to try to be attractive. Her pale lashless eyeslooked directly and uncompromisingly upon the world and her thin lips were ever set in haughtytightness. There was an air of dignity and pride about her now that, oddly enough, became herbetter than the determined girlish sweetness of her days at Twelve Oaks. The position she held wasalmost that of a widow. Everyone knew that Stuart Tarleton would have married her had he notbeen killed at Gettysburg, and so she was accorded the respect due a woman who had been wantedif not wed.

The six rooms of the little house on Ivy Street were soon scantily furnished with the cheapestpine and oak furniture in Franks store for, as Ashley was penniless and forced to buy on credit, herefused anything except the least expensive and bought only the barest necessities. Thisembarrassed Frank who was fond of Ashley and it distressed Scarlett. Both she and Frank wouldwillingly have given, without any charge, the finest mahogany and carved rosewood in the store,but the Wilkeses obstinately refused. Their house was painfully ugly and bare and Scarlett hated tosee Ashley living in the uncarpeted, uncurtained rooms. But he did not seem to notice hissurroundings and Melanie, having her own home for the first time since her marriage, was sohappy she was actually proud of the place. Scarlett would have suffered agonies of humiliation athaving friends find her without draperies and carpets and cushions and the proper number of chairsand teacups and spoons. But Melanie did the honors of her house as though plush curtains andbrocade sofas were hers.

For all her obvious happiness, Melanie was not well. Little Beau had cost her her health, and thehard work she had done at Tara since his birth had taken further toll of her strength. She was sothin that her small bones seemed ready to come through her white skin. Seen from a distance,romping about the back yard with her child, she looked like a little girl, for her waist wasunbelievably tiny and she had practically no figure. She had no bust and her hips were as flat aslittle Beaus and as she had neither the pride nor the good sense (so Scarlett thought) to sew rufflesin the bosom of her basque or pads on the back of her corsets, her thinness was very obvious. Likeher body, her face was too thin and too pale and her silky brows, arched and delicate as abutterflys feelers, stood out too blackly against her colorless skin. In her small face, her eyes weretoo large for beauty, the dark smudges under them making them appear enormous, but theexpression in them had not altered since the days of her unworried girlhood. War and constant painand hard work had been powerless against their sweet tranquility. They were the eyes of a happywoman, a woman around whom storms might blow without ever ruffling the serene core of herbeing.

How did she keep her eyes that way, thought Scarlett, looking at her enviously. She knew her own eyes sometimes had the look of a hungry cat. What was it Rhett had said once aboutMelanies eyessome foolishness about them being like candles? Oh, yes, like two good deeds ina naughty world. Yes, they were like candles, candles shielded from every wind, two soft lightsglowing with happiness at being home again among her friends.

The little house was always full of company. Melanie had been a favorite even as a child and thetown flocked to welcome her home again. Everyone brought presents for the house, bric-a-brac,pictures, a silver spoon or two, linen pillow cases, napkins, rag rugs, small articles which they hadsaved from Sherman and treasured but which they now swore were of no earthly use to them.

Old men who had campaigned in Mexico with her father came to see her, bringing visitors tomeet old Colonel Hamiltons sweet daughter. Her mothers old friends clustered about her, forMelanie had a respectful deference to her elders that was very soothing to dowagers in these wilddays when young people seemed to have forgotten all their manners. Her contemporaries, theyoung wives, mothers and widows, loved her because she had suffered what they had suffered, hadnot become embittered and always lent them a sympathetic ear. The young people came, as youngpeople always come, simply because they had a good time at her home and met there the friendsthey wanted to meet.

Around Melanies tactful and self-effacing person, there rapidly grew up a clique of young andold who represented what was left of the best of Atlantas ante-bellum society, all poor in purse, allproud in family, die-hards of the stoutest variety. It was as if Atlanta society, scattered and wreckedby war, depleted by death, bewildered by change, had found in her an unyielding nucleus aboutwhich it could re-form.

Melanie was young but she had in her all the qualities this embattled remnant prized, povertyand pride in poverty, uncomplaining courage, gaiety, hospitality, kindness and, above all, loyalty toall the old traditions. Melanie refused to change, refused even to admit that there was any reason tochange in a changing world. Under her roof the old days seemed to come back again and peopletook heart and felt even more contemptuous of the tide of wild life and high living that wassweeping the Carpetbaggers and newly rich Republicans along.

When they looked into her young face and saw there the inflexible loyalty to the old days, theycould forget, for a moment, the traitors within their own class who were causing fury, fear andheartbreak. And there were many such. There were men of good family, driven to desperation bypoverty, who had gone over to the enemy, become Republicans and accepted positions from theconquerors, so their families would not be on charity. There were young ex-soldiers who lackedthe courage to face the long years necessary to build up fortunes. These youngsters, following thelead of Rhett Butter, went hand in hand with the Carpetbaggers in money-making schemes ofunsavory kinds.

Worst of all the traitors were the daughters of some of Atlantas most prominent families. Thesegirls who had come to maturity since the surrender had only childish memories of the war andlacked the bitterness that animated their elders. They had lost no husbands, no lovers. They hadfew recollections of past wealth and splendor and the Yankee officers were so handsome andfinely dressed and so carefree. And they gave such splendid balls and drove such fine horses andsimply worshiped Southern girls! They treated them like queens and were so careful not to injure their touchy pride and, after allwhy not associate with them?

They were so much more attractive than the town swains who dressed so shabbily and were soserious and worked so hard that they had little time to play. So there had been a number ofelopements with Yankee officers which broke the hearts of Atlanta families. There were brotherswho passed sisters on the streets and did not speak and mothers and fathers who never mentioneddaughters names. Remembering these tragedies, a cold dread ran in the veins of those whosemotto was No surrendera dread which the very sight of Melanies soft but unyielding facedispelled. She was, as the dowagers said, such an excellent and wholesome example to the younggirls of the town. And, because she made no parade of her virtues the young girls did not resenther.

It never occurred to Melanie that she was becoming the leader of a new society. She onlythought the people were nice to come to see her and to want her in their little sewing circles,cotillion clubs and musical societies. Atlanta had always been musical and loved good music,despite the sneering comments of sister cities of the South concerning the towns lack of culture,and there was now an enthusiastic resurrection of interest that grew stronger as the times grewharder and more tense. It was easier to forget the impudent black faces in the streets and the blueuniforms of the garrison while they were listening to music.

Melanie was a little embarrassed to find herself at the head of the newly formed Saturday NightMusical Circle. She could not account for her elevation to this position except by the fact that shecould accompany anyone on the piano, even the Misses McLure who were tone deaf but whowould sing duets.

The truth of the matter was that Melanie had diplomatically managed to amalgamate the LadyHarpists, the Gentlemens Glee Club and the Young Ladies Mandolin and Guitar Society with theSaturday Night Musical Circle, so that now Atlanta had music worth listening to. In fact, theCircles rendition of The Bohemian Girl was said by many to be far superior to professionalperformances heard in New York and New Orleans. It was after she had maneuvered the LadyHarpists into the fold that Mrs. Merriwether said to Mrs. Meade and Mrs. Whiting that they musthave Melanie at the head of the Circle. If she could get on with the Harpists, she could get on withanyone, Mrs. Merriwether declared. That lady herself played the organ for the choir at theMethodist Church and, as an organist, had scant respect for harps or harpists.

Melanie had also been made secretary for both the Association for the Beautification of theGraves of Our Glorious Dead and the Sewing Circle for the Widows and Orphans of theConfederacy. This new honor came to her after an exciting joint meeting of those societies whichthreatened to end in violence and the severance of lifelong ties of friendship. The question hadarisen at the meeting as to whether or not weeds should be removed from the graves of the Unionsoldiers near those of Confederate soldiers. The appearance of the scraggly Yankee moundsdefeated all the efforts of the ladies to beautify those of their own dead. Immediately the fireswhich smoldered beneath tight basques flamed wildly and the two organizations split up andglared hostilely. The Sewing Circle was in favor of the removal of the weeds, the Ladies of theBeautification were violently opposed.

Mrs. Meade expressed the views of the latter group when she said: Dig up the weeds off Yankee graves? For two cents, Id dig up all the Yankees and throw them in the city dump!

At these ringing words the two associations arose and every lady spoke her mind and no onelistened. The meeting was being held in Mrs. Merriwethers parlor and Grandpa Merriwether, whohad been banished to the kitchen, reported afterwards that the noise sounded just like the openingguns of the battle of Franklin. And, he added, he guessed it was a dinged sight safer to be present atthe battle of Franklin than at the ladies meeting.

Somehow Melanie made her way to the center of the excited throng and somehow made herusually soft voice heard above the tumult. Her heart was in her throat with fright at daring toaddress the indignant gathering and her voice shook but she kept crying: Ladies! Please! till thedin died down.

I want to sayI mean, Ive thought for a long time thatthat not only should we pull up theweeds but we should plant flowers on II dont care what you think but every time I go to takeflowers to dear Charlies grave, I always put some on the grave of an unknown Yankee which isnear by. Itit looks so forlorn!

The excitement broke out again in louder words and this time the two organizations merged andspoke as one.

On Yankee graves! Oh, Melly, how could you! And they killed Charlie! They almost killedyou! Why, the Yankees might have killed Beau when he was born! They tried to burn you outof Tara!

Melanie held onto the back of her chair for support, almost crumpling beneath the weight of adisapproval she had never known before.

Oh, ladies! she cried, pleading. Please, let me finish! I know I havent the right to speak onthis matter, for none of my loved ones were killed except Charlie, and I know where he lies, thankGod! But there are so many among us today who do not know where their sons and husbands andbrothers are buried and

She choked and there was a dead silence in the room.

Mrs. Meades flaming eyes went somber. She had made the long trip to Gettysburg after thebattle to bring back Darcys body but no one had been able to tell her where he was buried.

Somewhere in some hastily dug trench in the enemys country. And Mrs. Allans mouth quivered.

Her husband and brother had been on that ill-starred raid Morgan made into Ohio and the lastinformation she had of them was that they fell on the banks of the river, just as the Yankee cavalrystormed up. She did not know where they lay. Mrs. Allisons son had died in a Northern prisoncamp and she, the poorest of the poor, was unable to bring his body home. There were others whohad read on casualty lists: Missingbelieved dead, and in those words had learned the last newsthey were ever to learn of men they had seen march away.

They turned to Melanie with eyes that said: Why do you open these wounds again? These arethe wounds that never healthe wounds of not knowing where they lie.

Melanies voice gathered strength in the stillness of the room.

Their graves are somewhere up in the Yankees country, just like the Yankee graves are here, and oh, how awful it would be to know that some Yankee woman said to dig them up and

Mrs. Meade made a small, dreadful sound.

But how nice it would be to know that some good Yankee woman And there must be somegood Yankee women. I dont care what people say, they cant all be bad! How nice it would be toknow that they pulled weeds off our mens graves and brought flowers to them, even if they wereenemies. If Charlie were dead in the North it would comfort me to know that someone And Idont care what you ladies think of me, her voice broke again, I will withdraw from both clubsand IllIll pull up every weed off every Yankees grave I can find and Ill plant flowers, tooandI just dare anyone to stop me!

With this final defiance Melanie burst into tears and tried to make her stumbling way to thedoor.

Grandpa Merriwether, safe in the masculine confines of the Girl of the Period Saloon an hourlater, reported to Uncle Henry Hamilton that after these words, everybody cried and embracedMelanie and it all ended up in a love feast and Melanie was made secretary of both organizations.

And they are going to pull up the weeds. The hell of it is Dolly said Id be only too pleased tohelp do it, cause I didnt have anything much else to do. I got nothing against the Yankees and Ithink Miss Melly was right and the rest of those lady wild cats wrong. But the idea of me pullingweeds at my time of life and with my lumbago!

Melanie was on the board of lady managers of the Orphans Home and assisted in the collectionof books for the newly formed Young Mens Library Association. Even the Thespians who gaveamateur plays once a month clamored for her. She was too timid to appear behind the kerosene-lamp footlights, but she could make costumes out of croker sacks if they were the only materialavailable. It was she who cast the deciding vote at the Shakespeare Reading Circle that the bardsworks should be varied with those of Mr. Dickens and Mr. Bulwer-Lytton and not the poems ofLord Byron, as had been suggested by a young and, Melanie privately feared, very fast bachelormember of the Circle.

In the nights of the late summer her small, feebly lighted house was always full of guests. Therewere never enough chairs to go around and frequently ladies sat on the steps of the front porchwith men grouped about them on the banisters, on packing boxes or on the lawn below. Sometimeswhen Scarlett saw guests sitting on the grass, sipping tea, the only refreshment the Wilkeses couldafford, she wondered how Melanie could bring herself to expose her poverty so shamelessly. UntilScarlett was able to furnish Aunt Pittys house as it had been before the war and serve her guestsgood wine and juleps and baked ham and cold haunches of venison, she had no intention of havingguests in her houseespecially prominent guests, such as Melanie had.

General John B. Gordon, Georgias great hero, was frequently there with his family. FatherRyan, the poet-priest of the Confederacy, never failed to call when passing through Atlanta. Hecharmed gatherings there with his wit and seldom needed much urging to recite his Sword ofLee or his deathless Conquered Banner, which never failed to make the ladies cry. AlexStephens, late Vice-President of the Confederacy, visited whenever in town and, when the wordwent about that he was at Melanies, the house was filled and people sat for hours under the spell of the frail invalid with the ringing voice. Usually there were a dozen children present, noddingsleepily in their parents arms, up hours after their normal bedtime. No family wanted its childrento miss being able to say in after years that they had been kissed by the great Vice-President or hadshaken the hand that helped to guide the Cause. Every person of importance who came to townfound his way to the Wilkes home and often they spent the night there. It crowded the little flat-topped house, forced India to sleep on a pallet in the cubbyhole that was Beaus nursery and sentDilcey speeding through the back hedge to borrow breakfast eggs from Aunt Pittys Cookie, butMelanie entertained them as graciously as if hers was a mansion.

No, it did not occur to Melanie that people rallied round her as round a worn and loved standard.

And so she was both astounded and embarrassed when Dr. Meade, after a pleasant evening at herhouse where he acquitted himself nobly in reading the part of Macbeth, kissed her hand and madeobservations in the voice he once used in speaking of Our Glorious Cause.

My dear Miss Melly, it is always a privilege and a pleasure to be in your home, for youandladies like youare the hearts of all of us, all that we have left. They have taken the flower of ourmanhood and the laughter of our young women. They have broken our health, uprooted our livesand unsettled our habits. They have ruined our prosperity, set us back fifty years and placed tooheavy a burden on the shoulders of our boys who should be in school and our old men who shouldbe sleeping in the sun. But we will build back, because we have hearts like yours to build upon.

And as long as we have them, the Yankees can have the rest!

Until Scarletts figure reached such proportions that even Aunt Pittys big black shawl did notconceal her condition, she and Frank frequently slipped through the back hedge to join thesummer-night gatherings on Melanies porch. Scarlett always sat well out of the light, hidden inthe protecting shadows where she was not only inconspicuous but could, unobserved, watchAshleys face to her hearts content.

It was only Ashley who drew her to the house, for the conversations bored and saddened her.

They always followed a set patternfirst, hard times; next, the political situation; and then,inevitably, the war. The ladies bewailed the high prices of everything and asked the gentlemen ifthey thought good times would ever come back. And the omniscient gentlemen always said, indeedthey would. Merely a matter of time. Hard times were just temporary. The ladies knew thegentlemen were lying and the gentlemen knew the ladies knew they were lying. But they liedcheerfully just the same and the ladies pretended to believe them. Everyone knew hard times werehere to stay.

Once the hard times were disposed of, the ladies spoke of the increasing impudence of thenegroes and the outrages of the Carpetbaggers and the humiliation of having the Yankee soldiersloafing on every corner. Did the gentlemen think the Yankees would ever get through withreconstructing Georgia? The reassuring gentlemen thought Reconstruction would be over in notimethat is, just as soon as the Democrats could vote again. The ladies were considerate enoughnot to ask when this would be. And having finished with politics, the talk about the war began.

Whenever two former Confederates met anywhere, there but one topic of conversation,andwhereadozenormoregatheredtogether,itwasafo(was) regone(never) conclusion that the war would be spiritedly refought. And always the word if had the most prominent part in thetalk.

If England had recognized us If Jeff Davis had commandeered all the cotton and gotten itto England before the blockade tightened If Longstreet had obeyed orders at Gettysburg

If Jeb Stuart hadnt been away on that raid when Marse Bob needed him If we hadnt lostStonewall Jackson If Vicksburg hadnt fallen If we could have held on another year

And always: If they hadnt replaced Johnston with Hood or If theyd put Hood in commandat Dalton instead of Johnston

If! If! The soft drawling voices quickened with an old excitement as they talked in the quietdarknessinfantryman, cavalryman, cannoneer, evoking memories of the days when life was everat high tide, recalling the fierce heat of their midsummer in this forlorn sunset of their winter.

They dont talk of anything else, thought Scarlett. Nothing but the war. Always the war. Andtheyll never talk of anything but the war. No, not until they die.

She looked about, seeing little boys lying in the crooks of their fathers arms, breath coming fast,eyes glowing, as they heard of midnight stories and wild cavalry dashes and flags planted onenemy breastworks. They were hearing drums and bugles and the Rebel yell, seeing footsore mengoing by in the rain with torn flags slanting.

And these children will never talk of anything else either. Theyll think it was wonderful andglorious to fight the Yankees and come home blind and crippledor not come home at all. Theyall like to remember the war, to talk about it. But I dont. I dont even like to think about it. Idforget it all if I couldoh, if I only could!

She listened with flesh crawling as Melanie told tales of Tara, making Scarlett a heroine as shefaced the invaders and saved Charles sword, bragging how Scarlett had put out the fire. Scarletttook no pleasure or pride in the memory of these things. She did not want to think of them at all.

Oh, why cant they forget? Why cant they look forward and not back? We were fools to fightthat war. And the sooner we forget it, the better well be.

But no one wanted to forget, no one, it seemed, except herself, so Scarlett was glad when shecould truthfully tell Melanie that she was embarrassed at appearing, even in the darkness. Thisexplanation was readily understood by Melanie who was hypersensitive about all matters relatingto childbirth. Melanie wanted another baby badly, but both Dr. Meade and Dr. Fontaine had saidanother child would cost her her life. So, only half resigned to her fate, she spent most of her timewith Scarlett, vicariously enjoying a pregnancy not her own. To Scarlett, scarcely wanting hercoming child and irritated at its untimeliness, this attitude seemed the height of sentimentalstupidity. But she had a guilty sense of pleasure that the doctors edict had made impossible anyreal intimacy between Ashley and his wife.

Scarlett saw Ashley frequently now but she never saw him alone. He came by the house everynight on his way home from the mill to report on the days work, but Frank and Pitty were usuallypresent or, worse still, Melanie and India. She could only ask businesslike questions and makesuggestions and then say: It was nice of you to come by. Good night.

If only she wasnt having a baby! Here was a God-given opportunity to ride out to the mill with him every morning, through the lonely woods, far from prying eyes, where they could imaginethemselves back In the County again in the unhurried days before the war.

No, she wouldnt try to make him say one word of love! She wouldnt refer to love in any way.

Shed sworn an oath to herself that she would never do that again. But, perhaps if she were alonewith him once more, he might drop that mask of impersonal courtesy he had worn since coming toAtlanta. Perhaps he might be his old self again, be the Ashley she had known before the barbecue,before any word of love had been spoken between them. If they could not be lovers, they could befriends again and she could warm her cold and lonely heart in the glow of his friendship.

If only I could get this baby over and done with, she thought impatiently, then I could ridewith him every day and we could talk

It was not only the desire to be with him that made her writhe with helpless impatience at herconfinement. The mills needed her. The mills had been losing money ever since she retired fromactive supervision, leaving Hugh and Ashley in charge.

Hugh was so incompetent, for all that he tried so hard. He was a poor trader and a poorer boss oflabor. Anyone could Jew him down on prices. If any slick contractor chose to say that the lumberwas of an inferior grade and not worth the price asked, Hugh felt that all a gentleman could do wasto apologize and take a lower price. When she heard of the price he received for a thousand feet offlooring, she burst into angry tears. The best grade of flooring the mill had ever turned out and hehad practically given it away! And he couldnt manage his labor crews. The negroes insisted onbeing paid every day and they frequently got drunk on their wages and did not turn up for work thenext morning. On these occasions Hugh was forced to hunt up new workmen and the mill was latein starting. With these difficulties Hugh didnt get into town to sell the lumber for days on end.

Seeing the profits slip from Hughs fingers, Scarlett became frenzied at her impotence and hisstupidity. Just as soon as the baby was born and she could go back to work, she would get rid ofHugh and hire some one else. Anyone would do better. And she would never fool with free niggersagain. How could anyone get any work done with free niggers quitting all the time?

Frank, she said, after a stormy interview with Hugh over his missing workmen, Ive aboutmade up my mind that Ill lease convicts to work the mills. A while back I was talking to JohnnieGallegher, Tommy Wellburns foreman, about the trouble we were having getting any work out ofthe darkies and he asked me why I didnt get convicts. It sounds like a good idea to me. He said Icould sublease them for next to nothing and feed them dirt cheap. And he said I could get work outof them in any way I liked, without having the Freedmans Bureau swarming down on me likehornets, sticking their bills into things that arent any of their business. And just as soon as JohnnieGalleghers contract with Tommy is up, Im going to hire him to run Hughs mill. Any man whocan get work out of that bunch of wild Irish he bosses can certainly get plenty of work out ofconvicts.

Convicts! Frank was speechless. Leasing convicts was the very worst of all the wild schemesScarlett had ever suggested, worse even than her notion of building a saloon.

At least, it seemed worse to Frank and the conservative circles in which he moved. This newsystem of leasing convicts had come into being because of the poverty of the state after the war.

Unable to support the convicts, the State was hiring them out to those needing large labor crews inthe building of railroads, in turpentine forests and lumber camps. While Frank and his quietchurchgoing friends realized the necessity of the system, they deplored it just the same. Many ofthem had not even believed in slavery and they thought this was far worse than slavery had everbeen.

And Scarlett wanted to lease convicts! Frank knew that if she did he could never hold up hishead again. This was far worse than owning and operating the mills herself, or anything else shehad done. His past objections had always been coupled with the question: What will people say?

But thisthis went deeper than fear of public opinion. He felt that it was a traffic in human bodieson a par with prostitution, a sin that would be on his soul if he permitted her to do it.

From this conviction of wrongness, Frank gathered courage to forbid Scarlett to do such a thing,and so strong were his remarks that she, startled, relapsed into silence. Finally to quiet him, shesaid meekly she hadnt really meant it She was just so outdone with Hugh and the free niggers shehad lost her temper. Secretly, she still thought about it and with some longing. Convict labor wouldsettle one of her hardest problems, but if Frank was going to take on so about itShe sighed. If even one of the mills were making money, she could stand it. But Ashley wasfaring little better with his mill than Hugh.

At first Scarlett was shocked and disappointed that Ashley did not immediately take hold andmake the mill pay double what it had paid under her management. He was so smart and he hadread so many books and there was no reason at all why he should not make a brilliant success andlots of money. But he was no more successful than Hugh. His inexperience, his errors, his utterlack of business judgment and his scruples about close dealing were the same as Hughs.

Scarletts love hastily found excuses for him and she did not consider the two men in the samelight. Hugh was just hopelessly stupid, while Ashley was merely new at the business. Still,unbidden, came the thought that Ashley could never make a quick estimate in his head and give aprice that was correct, as she could. And she sometimes wondered if hed ever learn to distinguishbetween planking and sills. And because he was a gentleman and himself trustworthy, he trustedevery scoundrel who came along and several times would have lost money for her if she had nottactfully intervened. And if he liked a personand he seemed to like so many people!he soldthem lumber on credit without ever thinking to find out if they had money in the bank or property.

He was as bad as Frank in that respect.

But surely he would learn! And while he was learning she had a fond and maternal indulgenceand patience for his errors. Every evening when he called at her house, weary and discouraged, shewas tireless in her tactful, helpful suggestions. But for all her encouragement and cheer, there wasa queer dead look in his eyes. She could not understand it and it frightened her. He was different,so different from the man he used to be. If only she could see him alone, perhaps she coulddiscover the reason.

The situation gave her many sleepless nights. She worried about Ashley, both because she knewhe was unhappy and because she knew his unhappiness wasnt helping him to become a goodlumber dealer. It was a torture to have her mills in the hands of two men with no more businesssense than Hugh and Ashley, heartbreaking to see her competitors taking her best customers away when she had worked so hard and planned so carefully for these helpless months. Oh, if she couldonly get back to work again! She would take Ashley in hand and then he would certainly learn.

And Johnnie Gallegher could run the other mill, and she could handle the selling, and theneverything would be fine. As for Hugh, he could drive a delivery wagon if he still wanted to workfor her. That was all he was good for.

Of course, Gallegher looked like an unscrupulous man, for all of his smartness, butwho elsecould she get? Why had the other men who were both smart and honest been so perverse aboutworking for her? If she only had one of them working for her now in place of Hugh, she wouldnthave to worry so much, butTommy Wellburn, in spite of his crippled back, was the busiest contractor in town and coiningmoney, so people said. Mrs. Merriwether and Ren were prospering and now had opened a bakerydowntown. Ren was managing it with true French thrift and Grandpa Merriwether, glad to escapefrom his chimney corner, was driving Rens pie wagon. The Simmons boys were so busy theywere operating their brick kiln with three shifts of labor a day. And Kells Whiting was cleaning upmoney with his hair straightener, because he told the negroes they wouldnt ever be permitted tovote the Republican ticket if they had kinky hair.

It the with all the smart young men she knew, the doctors, the lawyers, the storekeep(was) ers.Thea(same) pathy which had clutched them immediately after the war had completelydisappeared and they were too busy building their own fortunes to help her build hers. The oneswho were not busy were the men of Hughs typeor Ashleys.

What a mess it was to try to run a business and have a baby too!

Ill never have another one, she decided firmly. Im not going to be like other women andhave a baby every year. Good Lord, that would mean six months out of the year when Id have tobe away from the mills! And I see now I cant afford to be away from them even one day. I shallsimply tell Frank that I wont have any more children.

Frank wanted a big family, but she could manage Frank somehow. Her mind was made up. Thiswas her last child. The mills were far more important.

Chapter 42

SCARLETTS CHILD was a girl, a small bald-headed mite, ugly as a hairless monkey andabsurdly like Frank. No one except the doting father could see anything beautiful about her, but theneighbors were charitable enough to say that all ugly babies turned out pretty, eventually. She wasnamed Ella Lorena, Ella for her grandmother Ellen, and Lorena because it was the mostfashionable name of the day for girls, even as Robert E. Lee and Stonewall Jackson were popularfor boys and Abraham Lincoln and Emancipation for negro children.

She was born in the middle of a week when frenzied excitement gripped Atlanta and the air wastense with expectation of disaster. A negro who had boasted of rape had actually been arrested, butbefore he could be brought to trial the jail had been raided by the Ku Klux Klan and he had beenquietly hanged. The Klan had acted to save the as yet unnamed victim from having to testify in open court. Rather than have her appear and advertise her shame, her father and brother wouldhave shot her, so lynching the negro seemed a sensible solution to the townspeople, in fact, theonly decent solution possible. But the military authorities were in a fury. They saw no reason whythe girl should mind testifying publicly.

The soldiers made arrests right and left, swearing to wipe out the Klan if they had to put everywhite man in Atlanta in jail. The negroes, frightened and sullen, muttered of retaliatory houseburnings. The air was thick with rumors of wholesale hangings by the Yankees should the guiltyparties be found and of a concerted uprising against the whites by the negroes. The people of thetown stayed at home behind locked doors and shuttered windows, the men fearing to go to theirbusinesses and leave their women and children unprotected.

Scarlett, lying exhausted in bed, feebly and silently thanked God that Ashley had too much senseto belong to the Klan and Frank was too old and poor spirited. How dreadful it would be to knowthat the Yankees might swoop down and arrest them at any minute! Why didnt the crack-brainedyoung fools in the Klan leave bad enough alone and not stir up the Yankees like this? Probably thegirl hadnt been raped after all. Probably shed just been frightened silly and, because of her, a lotof men might lose their lives.

In this atmosphere, straining watching slow fuse burn toward a barrel of gunpowder,Scarlettcame(as) rapidl(nerve) ybacktost(as) rength.The(a) healthy vigor which had carried herthrough the hard days at Tara stood her in good stead now, and within two weeks of Ella Lorenasbirth she was strong enough to sit up and chafe at her inactivity. In three weeks she was up,declaring she had to see to the mills. They were standing idle because both Hugh and Ashleyfeared to leave their families alone all day.

Then the blow fell.

Frank, full of the pride of new fatherhood, summoned up courage enough to forbid Scarlettleaving the house while conditions were so dangerous. His commands would not have worried herat all and she would have gone about her business in spite of them, if he had not put her horse andbuggy in the livery stable and ordered that they should not be surrendered to anyone excepthimself. To make matters worse, he and Mammy had patiently searched the house while she was illand unearthed her hidden store of money. And Frank had deposited it in the bank in his own name,so now she could not even hire a rig.

Scarlett raged at both Frank and Mammy, then was reduced to begging and finally cried all onemorning like a furious thwarted child. But for all her pains she heard only: There, Sugar! Yourejust a sick little girl. And: Miss Scarlett, ef you doan quit cahyin on so, you gwine sour yo milkan de baby have colic, sho as guns iron.

In a furious temper, Scarlett charged through her back yard to Melanies house and thereunburdened herself at the top of her voice, declaring she would walk to the mills, she would goabout Atlanta telling everyone what a varmint she had married, she would not be treated like anaughty simple-minded child. She would carry a pistol and shoot anyone who threatened her. Shehad shot one man and she would love, yes, love to shoot another. She wouldMelanie who feared to venture onto her own front porch was appalled by such threats.

Oh, you must not risk yourself! I should die if anything happened to you! Oh, please

I will! I will! I will walk

Melanie looked at her and saw that this was not the hysteria of a woman still weak fromchildbirth. There was the same breakneck, headlong determination in Scarletts face that Melaniehad often seen in Gerald OHaras face when his mind was made up. She put her arms aroundScarletts waist and held her tightly.

Its all my fault for not being brave like you and for keeping Ashley at home with me all thistime when he should have been at the mill. Oh, dear! Im such a ninny! Darling, Ill tell AshleyIm not a bit frightened and Ill come over and stay with you and Aunt Pitty and he can go back towork and

Not even to herself would Scarlett admit that she did not think Ashley could cope with thesituation alone and she shouted: Youll do nothing of the kind! What earthly good would Ashleydo at work if he was worried about you every minute? Everybody is just so hateful! Even UnclePeter refuses to go out with me! But I dont care! Ill go alone. Ill walk every step of the way andpick up a crew of darkies somewhere

Oh, no! You mustnt do that! Something dreadful might happen to you. They say thatShantytown settlement on the Decatur road is just full of mean darkies and youd have to pass rightby it. Let think Darling, promise me you wont do anything today and Ill think ofsomething. Pro(me) mise me youll go home and lie down. You look right peaked. Promise me.

Because she was too exhausted by her anger to do otherwise, Scarlett sulkily promised and wenthome, haughtily refusing any overtures of peace from her household.

That afternoon a strange figure stumped through Melanies hedge and across Pittys back yard.

Obviously, he was one of those men whom Mammy and Dilcey referred to as de riff-raff whutMiss Melly pick up off de streets an let sleep in her cellar.

There were three rooms in the basement of Melanies house which formerly had been servants

quarters and a wine room. Now Dilcey occupied one, and the other two were in constant use by astream of miserable and ragged transients. No one but Melanie knew whence they came or wherethey were going and no one but she knew where she collected them. Perhaps the negroes wereright and she did pick them up from the streets. But even as the great and the near great gravitatedto her small parlor, so unfortunates found their way to her cellar where they were fed, bedded andsent on their way with packages of food. Usually the occupants of the rooms were formerConfederate soldiers of the rougher, illiterate type, homeless men, men without families, beatingtheir way about the country in hope of finding work.

Frequently, brown and withered country women with broods of tow-haired silent children spentthe night there, women widowed by the war, dispossessed of their farms, seeking relatives whoscattered and lost. Sometimes the neighborhood was scandalized by the presence offoreig(were) ners, speaking little or no English, who had been drawn South by glowing tales of fortuneseasily made. Once a Republican had slept there. At least, Mammy insisted he was a Republican,saying she could smell a Republican, same as a horse could smell a rattlesnake; but no one believedMammys story, for there must be some limit even to Melanies charity. At least everyone hoped so.

Yes, thought Scarlett, sitting on the side porch in the pale November sunshine with the baby onher lap, he is one of Melanies lame dogs. And hes really lame, at that!

The man who was making his way across the back yard stumped, like Will Benteen, on awooden leg. He was a tall, thin old man with a bald head, which shone pinkishly dirty, and agrizzled beard so long he could tuck it in his belt. He was over sixty, to judge by his hard, seamedface, but there was no sag of age to his body. He was lank and ungainly but, even with his woodenpeg, he moved as swiftly as a snake.

He mounted the steps and came toward her and, even before he spoke, revealing in his tones atwang and a burring of r s unusual in the lowlands, Scarlett knew that he was mountain born.

For all his dirty, ragged clothes there was about him, as about most mountaineers, an air of fiercesilent pride that permitted no liberties and tolerated no foolishness. His beard was stained withtobacco juice and a large wad in his jaw made his face look deformed. His nose was thin andcraggy, his eyebrows bushy and twisted, into witches locks and a lush growth of hair sprang fromhis ears, giving them the tufted look of a lynxs ears. Beneath his brow was one hollow socketfrom which a scar ran down his cheek, carving a diagonal line through his beard. The other eyewas small, pale and cold, an unwinking and remorseless eye. There was a heavy pistol openly inhis trouser band and from the top of his tattered boot protruded the hilt of a bowie knife.

He returned Scarletts stare coldly and spat across the rail of the banister before he spoke. Therewas contempt in his one eye, not a personal contempt for her, but for her whole sex.

Miz Wilkes sont me to work for you, he said shortly. He spoke rustily, as one unaccustomed tospeaking, the words coming slowly and almost with difficulty. M names Archie.

Im sorry but I have no work for you, Mr. Archie.

Archies mfuss name.

I beg your pardon. What is your last name?

He spat again. I reckon thats my bizness, he said. Archiell do.

I dont care what your last name is! I have nothing for you to do.

I reckon you have. Miz Wilkes was upsot about yore wantin to run aroun like a fool byyoreself and she sont me over here to drive aroun with you.

Indeed? cried Scarlett, indignant both at the mans rudeness and Mellys meddling.

His one eye met hers with an impersonal animosity. Yes. A womans got no bizness botherin

her men folks when theyre tryin to take keer of her. If youre bound to gad about, Ill drive you. Ihates niggersYankees too.

He shifted his wad of tobacco to the other cheek and, without waiting for an invitation, sat downon the top step. I aint sayin I like drivin women aroun, but Miz Wilkes been good to me, lettin

me sleep in her cellar, and she sont me to drive you.

But began Scarlett helplessly and then she stopped and looked at him. After a moment shebegan to smile. She didnt like the looks of this elderly desperado but his presence would simplify matters. With him beside her, she could go to town, drive to the mills, call on customers. No onecould doubt her safety with him and his very appearance was enough to keep from giving rise toscandal.

Its a bargain, she said. That is, if my husband agrees.

After a private conversation with Archie, Frank gave his reluctant approval and sent word to thelivery stable to release the horse and buggy. He was hurt and disappointed that motherhood had notchanged Scarlett as he had hoped it would but, if she was determined to go back to her damnablemills, then Archie was a godsend.

So began the relationship that at first startled Atlanta. Archie and Scarlett were a queerlyassorted pair, the truculent dirty old man with his wooden peg sticking stiffly out over thedashboard and the pretty, neatly dressed young woman with forehead puckered in an abstractedfrown. They could be seen at all hours and at all places in and near Atlanta, seldom speaking toeach other, obviously disliking each other, but bound together by mutual need, he of money, she ofprotection. At least, said the ladies of the town, its better than riding around so brazenly with thatButler man. They wondered curiously where Rhett was these days, for he had abruptly left townthree months before and no one, not even Scarlett, knew where he was.

Archie was a silent man, never speaking unless spoken to and usually answering with grunts.

Every morning he came from Melanies cellar and sat on the front steps of Pittys house, chewingand spitting until Scarlett came out and Peter brought the buggy from the stable. Uncle Peter fearedhim only a little less than the devil or the Ku Klux and even Mammy walked silently andtimorously around him. He hated negroes and they knew it and feared him. He reinforced his pistoland knife with another pistol, and his fame spread far among the black population. He never oncehad to draw a pistol or even lay his hand on his belt. The moral effect was sufficient. No negrodared even laugh while Archie was in hearing.

Once Scarlett asked him curiously why he hated negroes and was surprised when he answered,for generally all questions were answered by I reckon thats my bizness.

I hates them, like all mountain folks hates them. We never liked them and we never ownednone. It was them niggers that started the war. I hates them for that, too.

But you fought in the war.

I reckon thats a mans privilege. I hates Yankees too, moren I hates niggers. Most as much asI hates talkative women.

It was such outspoken rudeness as this that threw Scarlett into silent furies and made her long tobe rid of him. But how could she do without him? In what other way could she obtain suchfreedom? He was rude and dirty and, occasionally, very odorous but he served his purpose. Hedrove her to and from the mills and on her round of customers, spitting and staring off into spacewhile she talked and gave orders. If she climbed down from the buggy, he climbed after her anddogged her footsteps. When she was among rough laborers, negroes or Yankee soldiers, he wasseldom more than a pace from her elbow.

Soon Atlanta became accustomed to seeing Scarlett and her bodyguard and, from beingaccustomed, the ladies grew to envy her her freedom of movement. Since the Ku Klux lynching, the ladies had been practically immured, not even going to town to shop unless there were half adozen in their group. Naturally social minded, they became restless and, putting their pride in theirpockets, they began to beg the loan of Archie from Scarlett. And whenever she did not need him,she was gracious enough to spare him for the use of other ladies.

Soon Archie became an Atlanta institution and the ladies competed for his free time. There wasseldom a morning when a child or a negro servant did not arrive at breakfast time with a notesaying: If you arent using Archie this afternoon, do let me have him. I want to drive to thecemetery with flowers. I must go to the milliners. I should like Archie to drive Aunt Nelly foran airing. I must go calling on Peters Street and Grandpa is not feeling well enough to take me.

Could Archie

He drove them all, maids, matrons and widows, and toward all he evidenced the sameuncompromising contempt. It was obvious that he did not like women, Melanie excepted, anybetter than he liked negroes and Yankees. Shocked at first by his rudeness, the ladies finallybecame accustomed to him and, as he was so silent, except for intermittent explosions of tobaccojuice, they took him as much for granted as the horses he drove and forgot his very existence. Infact, Mrs. Merriwether related to Mrs. Meade the complete details of her nieces confinement beforeshe even remembered Archies presence on the front seat of the carriage.

At no other time than this could such a situation have been possible. Before the war, he wouldnot have been permitted even in the ladies kitchens. They would have handed him food throughthe back door and sent him about his business. But now they welcomed his reassuring presence.

Rude, illiterate, dirty, he was a bulwark between the ladies and the terrors of Reconstruction. Hewas neither friend nor servant. He was a hired bodyguard, protecting the women while their menworked by day or were absent from home at night.

It seemed to Scarlett that after Archie came to work for her Frank was away at night veryfrequently. He said the books at the store had to be balanced and business was brisk enough now togive him little time to attend to this in working hours. And there were sick friends with whom hehad to sit. Then there was the organization of Democrats who forgathered every Wednesday nightto devise ways of regaining the ballot and Frank never missed a meeting. Scarlett thought thisorganization did little else except argue the merits of General John B. Gordon over every ottergeneral, except General Lee, and refight the war. Certainly she could observe no progress in thedirection of the recovery of the ballot. But Frank evidently enjoyed the meetings for he stayed outuntil all hours on those nights.

Ashley also sat up with the sick and he, too, attended the Democratic meetings and he wasusually away on the same nights as Frank. On these nights, Archie escorted Pitty, Scarlett, Wadeand little Ella though the back yard to Melanies house and the two families spent the eveningstogether. The ladies sewed while Archie lay full length on the parlor sofa snoring, his graywhiskers fluttering at each rumble. No one had invited him to dispose himself on the sofa and as itwas the finest piece of furniture in the house, the ladies secretly moaned every time he lay down onit, planting his boot on the pretty upholstery. But none of them had the courage to remonstrate withhim. Especially after he remarked that it was lucky he went to sleep easy, for otherwise the soundof women clattering like a flock of guinea hens would certainly drive him crazy.

Scarlett sometimes wondered where Archie had come from and what his life had been before hecame to live in Mellys cellar but she asked no questions. There was that about his grim one-eyedface which discouraged curiosity. All she knew was that his voice bespoke the mountains to thenorth and that he had been in the army and had lost both leg and eye shortly before the surrender. Itwas words spoken in a fit of anger against Hugh Elsing which brought out the truth of Archiespast.

One morning, the old man had driven her to Hughs mill and she had found it idle, the negroesgone and Hugh sitting despondently under a tree. His crew had not made their appearance thatmorning and he was at a loss as to what to do. Scarlett was in a furious temper and did not scrupleto expend it on Hugh, for she had just received an order for a large amount of lumbera rushorder at that. She had used energy and charm and bargaining to get that order and now the mill wasquiet.

Drive me out to the other mill, she directed Archie. Yes, I know itll take a long time and wewont get any dinner but what am I paying you for? Ill have to make Mr. Wilkes stop what hesdoing and run me off this lumber. Like as not, his crew wont be working either. Great balls of fire!

I never saw such a nincompoop as Hugh Elsing! Im going to get rid of him just as soon as thatJohnnie Gallegher finishes the stores hes building. What do I care if Gallegher was in the YankeeArmy? Hell work. I never saw a lazy Irishman yet. And Im through with free issue darkies. Youjust cant depend on them. Im going to get Johnnie Gallegher and lease me some convicts. Hellget work out of them. Hell

Archie turned to her, his eye malevolent, and when he spoke there was cold anger in his rustyvoice.

The day you gits convicts is the day I quits you, he said.

Scarlett was startled. Good heavens! Why?

I knows about convict leasin. I calls it convict murderin. Buyin men like they was mules.

Treatin them worse than mules ever was treated. Beatin them, starvin them, killin them. Andwho cares? The State dont care. Its got the lease money. The folks that gits the convicts, theydont care. All they want is to feed them cheap and git all the work they can out of them. Hell,Mam. I never thought much of women and I think less of them now.

Is it any of your business?

I reckon, said Archie laconically and, after a pause, I was a convict for nigh on to fortyyears.

Scarlett gasped, and, for a moment, shrank back against the cushions. This then was the answerto the riddle of Archie, his unwillingness to tell his last name or the place of his birth or any scrapof his past life, the answer to the difficulty with which he spoke and his cold hatred of the world.

Forty years! He must have gone into prison a young man. Forty years! Whyhe must have been alife prisoner and lifers wereWas itmurder?

Yes, answered Archie briefly, as he flapped the reins. M wife.

Scarletts eyelids batted rapidly with fright. The mouth beneath the beard seemed to move, as ifhe were smiling grimly at her fear. I aint goin to kill you, Mam, if thats whats frettin you.

Thar aint but one reason for killin a woman.

You killed your wife!

She was layin with my brother. He got away. I aint sorry none that I kilt her. Loose womenought to be kilt. The law aint got no right to put a man in jail for that but I was sont.

Buthow did you get out? Did you escape? Were you pardoned?

You might call it a pardon. His thick gray brows writhed together as though the effort ofstringing words together was difficult.

Long in sixty-four when Sherman come through, I was at Milledgeville jail, like I had beenfor forty years. And the warden he called all us prisoners together and he says the Yankees are acomin

a-burnin and a-killin. Now if thats one thing I hates worse than a nigger or a woman, itsa Yankee.

Why? Had you Did you ever know any Yankees?

Nom. But Id beam tell of them. Id beam tell they couldnt never mind their own bizness. Ihates folks who cant mind their own bizness. What was they doin in Georgia, freein our niggersand burnin our houses and killin our stock? Well, the warden he said the army needed moresoldiers bad, and any of us whod jine up would be free at the end of the warif we come outalive. But us lifersus murderers, the warden he said the army didnt want us. We was to be sontsomewheres else to another jail. But I said to the warden I aint like most lifers. Im just in forkillin my wife and she needed killin. And I wants to fight the Yankees. And the warden he sawmy side of it and he slipped me out with the other prisoners.

He paused and grunted.

Huh. That was right funny. They put me in jail for killin and they let me out with a gun in myhand and a free pardon to do more killin. It shore was good to be a free man with a rifle in myhand again. Us men from Milledgeville did good fightin and killinand a lot of us was kilt. Inever knowed one who deserted. And when the surrender come, we was free. I lost this here legand this here eye. But I aint sorry.

Oh, said Scarlett, weakly.

She tried to remember what she had heard about the releasing of the Milledgeville convicts inthat last desperate effort to stem the tide of Shermans army. Frank had mentioned it that Christmasof 1864. What had he said? But her memories of that time were too chaotic. Again she felt the wildterror of those days, heard the siege guns, saw the line of wagons dripping blood into the red roads,saw the Home Guard marching off, the little cadets and the children like Phil Meade and the oldmen like Uncle Henry and Grandpa Merriwether. And the convicts had marched out too, to die inthe twilight of the Confederacy, to freeze in the snow and sleet of that last campaign in Tennessee.

For a brief moment she thought what a fool this old man was, to fight for a state which hadtaken forty years from his life. Georgia had taken his youth and his middle years for a crime thatwas no crime to him, yet he had freely given a leg and an eye to Georgia. The bitter words Rhett had spoken in the early days of the war came back to her, and she remembered him saying hewould never fight for a society that had made him an outcast. But when the emergency had arisenhe had gone off to fight for that same society, even as Archie had done. It seemed to her that allSouthern men, high or low, were sentimental fools and cared less for their hides than for wordswhich had no meaning.

She looked at Archies gnarled old hands, his two pistols and his knife, and fear pricked heragain. Were there other ex-convicts at large, like Archie, murderers, desperadoes, thieves,pardoned for their crimes, in the name of the Confederacy? Why, any stranger on the street mightbe a murderer! If Frank ever learned the truth about Archie, there would be the devil to pay. Or ifAunt Pittybut the shock would kill Pitty. And as for MelanieScarlett almost wished she couldtell Melanie the truth about Archie. It would serve her right for picking up trash and foisting it offon her friends and relatives.

ImIm glad you told me, Archie. II wont tell anyone. It would be a great shock to Mrs.

Wilkes and the other ladies if they knew.

Huh. Miz Wilkes knows. I told her the night she fuss let me sleep in her cellar. You dont thinkId let a nice lady like her take me into her house not knowin?

Saints preserve us! cried Scarlet, aghastMelanie knew this man was a murderer and a woman murderer at that and she hadnt ejectedhim from her house. She had trusted her son with him and her aunt and sister-in-law and all herfriends. And she, the most timid of females, had not been frightened to be alone with him in herhouse.

Miz Wilkes is right sensible, for a woman. She lowed that I was all right She lowed that a liarallus kept on lyin and a thief kept on stealin but folks dont do moren one murder in a lifetime.

And she reckoned as how anybody whod fought for the Confederacy had wiped out anything badtheyd done. Though I dont hold that I done nothin bad, killin my wife. ... Yes, Miz Wilkes isright sensible, for a woman. ... And Im tellin you, the day you leases convicts is the day I quitsyou.

Scarlett made no reply but she thought,The sooner you quit me the better it will suit me. A murderer!

How could Melly have been soso Well, there was no word for Melanies action in taking inthis old ruffian and not telling her friends he Was a jailbird. So service in the army wiped out pastsins! Melanie had that mixed up with baptism! But then Melly was utterly silly about theConfederacy, its veterans, and anything pertaining to them. Scarlett silently damned the Yankeesand added another mark on her score against them. They were responsible for a situation thatforced a woman to keep a murderer at her side to protect her.

Driving home with Archie in the chill twilight, Scarlett saw a clutter of saddle horses, buggiesand wagons outside the Girl of the Period Saloon. Ashley was sitting on his horse, a strained alertlook on his face; the Simmons boys were leaning from their buggy, making emphatic gestures; Hugh Elsing, his lock of brown hair falling in his eyes, was waving his hands. GrandpaMerriwethers pie wagon was in the center of the tangle and, as she came closer, Scarlett saw thatTommy Wellburn and Uncle Henry Hamilton were crowded on the seat with him.

I wish, thought Scarlett irritably, that Uncle Henry wouldnt ride home in that contraption.

He ought to be ashamed to be seen in it. It isnt as though he didnt have a horse of his own. Hejust does it so he and Grandpa can go to the saloon together every night

As she came abreast the crowd something of their tenseness reached her, insensitive though shewas, and made fear clutch at her heart.

Oh! she thought. I hope no one else has been raped! If the Ku Klux lynch just one moredarky the Yankees will wipe us out! And she spoke to Archie. Pull up. Somethings wrong.

You aint goin to stop outside a saloon, said Archie.

You heard me. Pull up. Good evening, everybody. AshleyUncle Henryis somethingwrong? You all look so

The crowd turned to her, ripping their hats and smiling, but there was a driving excitement intheir eyes.

Somethings right and somethings wrong, barked Uncle Henry. Depends on how you look atit. The way I figure is the legislature couldnt have done different.

The legislature? thought Scarlett in relief. She had little interest in the legislature, feeling that itsdoings could hardly affect her. It was the prospect of the Yankee soldiers on a rampage again thatfrightened her.

Whats the legislature been up to now?

Theyve flatly refused to ratify the amendment, said Grandpa Merriwether and there was pridein his voice. Thatll show the Yankees.

And therell be hell to pay for itI beg your pardon, Scarlett, said Ashley.

Oh, the amendment? questioned Scarlett, trying to look intelligent.

Politics were beyond her and she seldom wasted time thinking about them. There had been aThirteenth Amendment ratified sometime before or maybe it had been the Sixteenth Amendmentbut what ratification meant she had no idea. Men were always getting excited about such things.

Something of her lack of comprehension showed in her face and Ashley smiled.

Its the amendment letting the darkies vote, you know, he explained. It was submitted to thelegislature and they refused to ratify it.

How silly of them! You know the Yankees are going to force it down our throats!

Thats what I meant by saying thered be hell to pay, said Ashley.

Im proud of the legislature, proud of their gumption! shouted Uncle Henry. The Yankeescant force it down our throats if we wont have it

They can and they will. Ashleys voice was calm but there was worry in his eyes. And itllmake things just that much harder for us.

Oh, Ashley, surely not! Things couldnt be any harder than they are now!

Yes, things can get worse, even worse than they are now. Suppose we have a darky legislature?

A darky governor? Suppose we have a worse military rule than we now have?

Scarletts eyes grew large with fear as some understanding entered her mind.

Ive been trying to think what would be best for Georgia, best for all of us. Ashleys face wasdrawn. Whether its wisest to fight this thing like the legislature has done, rouse the North againstus and bring the whole Yankee Army on us to cram the darky vote down us, whether we want it ornot. Orswallow our pride as best we can, submit gracefully and get the whole matter over withas easily as possible. It will amount to the same thing in the end. Were helpless. Weve got to takethe dose theyre determined to give us. Maybe it would be better for us to take it without kicking.

Scarlett hardly heard his words, certainly their full import went over her head. She knew thatAshley, as usual, was seeing both sides of a question. She was seeing only one sidehow this slapin the Yankees faces might affect her.

Going to turn Radical and vote the Republican ticket, Ashley? jeered Grandpa Merriwetherharshly.

There was a tense silence. Scarlett saw Archies hand make a swift move toward his pistol andthen stop. Archie thought, and frequently said, that Grandpa was an old bag of wind and Archiehad no intention of letting him insult Miss Melanies husband, even if Miss Melanies husband wastalking like a fool.

The perplexity vanished suddenly from Ashleys eyes and hot anger flared. But before he couldspeak, Uncle Henry charged Grandpa.

You Godyou blast I beg your pardon, Scarlett Grandpa, you jackass, dont you say thatto Ashley!

Ashley can take care of himself without you defending him, said Grandpa coldly. And he istalking like a Scalawag. Submit, hell! I beg your pardon, Scarlett.

I didnt believe in secession, said Ashley and his voice shook with anger. But when Georgiaseceded, I went with her. And I didnt believe in war but I fought in the war. And I dont believe inmaking the Yankees madder than they already are. But if the legislature has decided to do it, Illstand by the legislature. I

Archie, said Uncle Henry abruptly, drive Miss Scarlett on home. This isnt any place for her.

Politics arent for women folks anyway, and theres going to be cussing in a minute. Go on, Archie.

Good night, Scarlett.

As they drove off down Peachtree Street, Scarletts heart was beating fast with fear. Would thisfoolish action of the legislature have any effect on her safety? Would it so enrage the Yankees thatshe might lose her mills?

Well, sir, rumbled Archie, Ive hearn tell of rabbits spittin in bulldogs faces but I aint neverseen it till now. Them legislatures might just as well have hollered Hurray for Jeff Davis and theSouthern Confederacy for all the good itll do themand us. Them nigger-lovin Yankees havemade up their mind to make the niggers our bosses. But you got to admire them legislatures sperrit!

Admire them? Great balls of fire! Admire them? They ought to be shot! Itll bring the Yankeesdown on us like a duck on a June bug. Why couldnt they have ratiradiwhatever they weresupposed to do to it and smoothed the Yankees down instead of stirring them up again? Theyregoing to make us knuckle under and we may as well knuckle now as later.

Archie fixed her with a cold eye.

Knuckle under without a fight? Women aint got no more pride than goats.

When Scarlett leased ten convicts, five for each of her mills, Archie made good his threat andrefused to have anything further to do with her. Not all Melanies pleading or Franks promises ofhigher pay would induce him to take up the reins again. He willingly escorted Melanie and Pittyand India and their friends about the town but not Scarlett. He would not even drive for the otherladies if Scarlett was in the carriage. It was an embarrassing situation, having the old desperadositting in judgment upon her, and it was still more embarrassing to know that her family andfriends agreed with the old man.

Frank pleaded with her against taking the step. Ashley at first refused to work convicts and waspersuaded, against his will, only after tears and supplications and promises that when times werebetter she would hire free darkies. Neighbors were so outspoken in their disapproval that Frank,Pitty and Melanie found it hard to hold up their heads. Even Peter and Mammy declared that it wasbad luck to work convicts and no good would come of it. Everyone said it was wrong to takeadvantage of the miseries and misfortunes of others.

You didnt have any objections to working slaves! Scarlett cried indignantly.

Ah, but that was different. Slaves were neither miserable nor unfortunate. The negroes were farbetter off under slavery than they were now under freedom, and if she didnt believe it, just lookabout her! But, as usual, opposition had the effect of making Scarlett more determined on hercourse. She removed Hugh from the management of the mill, put him to driving a lumber wagonand closed the final details of hiring Johnnie Gallegher.

He seemed to be the only person she knew who approved of the convicts. He nodded his bullethead briefly and said it was a smart move. Scarlett, looking at the little ex-jockey, planted firmlyon his short bowed legs, his gnomish face hard and businesslike, thought: Whoever let him ridetheir horses didnt care much for horse flesh. I wouldnt let him get within ten feet of any horse ofmine.

But she had no qualms in trusting him with a convict gang.

And Im to have a free hand with the gang? he questioned, his eyes as cold as gray agates.

A free hand. All I ask is that you keep that mill running and deliver my lumber when I want itand as much as I want.

Im your man, said Johnnie shortly. Ill tell Mr. Wellburn Im leaving him.

As he rolled off through the crowd of masons and carpenters and hod carriers Scarlett felt relieved and her spirits rose. Johnnie was indeed her man. He was tough and hard and there was nononsense about him. Shanty Irish on the make, Frank had contemptuously called him, but forthat very reason Scarlett valued him. She knew that an Irishman with a determination to getsomewhere was a valuable man to have, regardless of what his personal characteristics might be.

And she felt a closer kinship with him than with many men of her own class, for Johnnie knew thevalue of money.

The first week he took over the mill he justified all her hopes, for he accomplished more withfive convicts than Hugh had ever done with his crew of ten free negroes. More than that, he gaveScarlett greater leisure than she had had since she came to Atlanta the year before, because he hadno liking for her presence at the mill and said so frankly.

You tend to your end of selling and let me tend to my end of lumbering, he said shortly. Aconvict camp aint any place for a lady and if nobody elsell tell you so, Johnnie Gallegherstelling you now. Im delivering your lumber, aint I? Well, Ive got no notion to be pestered everyday like Mr. Wilkes. He needs pestering. I dont.

So Scarlett reluctantly stayed away from Johnnies mill, fearing that if she came too often hemight quit and that would be ruinous. His remark that Ashley needed pestering stung her, for therewas more truth in it than she liked to admit. Ashley was doing little better with convicts than hehad done with free labor, although why, he was unable to tell. Moreover, he looked as if he wereashamed to be working convicts and he had little to say to her these days.

Scarlett was worried by the change that was coming over him. There were gray hairs in hisbright head now and a tired slump in his shoulders. And he seldom smiled. He no longer lookedthe debonair Ashley who had caught her fancy so many years before. He looked like a mansecretly gnawed by a scarcely endurable pain and there was a grim tight look about his mouth thatbaffled and hurt her. She wanted to drag his head fiercely down on her shoulder, stroke the grayinghair and cry: Tell me whats worrying you! Ill fix it! Ill make it right for you!

But his formal, remote air kept her at arms length.

Chapter 43

IT WAS ONE of those rare December days when the sun was almost as warm as Indian summer.

Dry red leaves still clung to the oak in Aunt Pittys yard and a faint yellow green still persisted inthe dying grass. Scarlett, with the baby in her arms, stepped out onto the side porch and sat downin a rocking chair in a patch of sunshine. She was wearing a new green challis dress trimmed withyards and yards of black rickrack braid and a new lace house cap which Aunt Pitty had made forher. Both were very becoming to her and she knew it and took great pleasure in them. How good itwas to look pretty again after the long months of looking so dreadful!

As she sat rocking the baby and humming to herself, she heard the sound of hooves coming upthe side street and, peering curiously through the tangle of dead vines on the porch, she saw RhettButler riding toward the house.

He had been away from Atlanta for months, since just after Gerald died, since long before Ella Lorena was born. She had missed him but she now wished ardently that there was some way toavoid seeing him. In fact, the sight of his dark face brought a feeling of guilty panic to her breast. Amatter in which Ashley was concerned lay on her conscience and she did not wish to discuss itwith Rhett, but she knew he would force the discussion, no matter how disinclined she might be.

He drew up at the gate and swung lightly to the ground and she thought, staring nervously athim, that he looked just like an illustration in a book Wade was always pestering her to read aloud.

All he needs is earrings and a cutlass between his teeth, she thought. Well, pirate or no, hesnot going to cut my throat today if I can help it.

As he came up the walk she called a greeting to him, summoning her sweetest smile. How luckythat she had on her new dress and the becoming cap and looked so pretty! As his eyes went swiftlyover her, she knew he thought her pretty, too.

A new baby! Why, Scarlett, this is a surprise! he laughed, leaning down to push the blanketaway from Ella Lorenas small ugly face.

Dont be silly, she said, blushing. How are you, Rhett? Youve been away a long time.

So I have. Let me hold the baby, Scarlett. Oh, I know how to hold babies. I have many strangeaccomplishments. Well, he certainly looks like Frank. All except the whiskers, but give him time.

I hope not. Its a girl.

A girl? Thats better still. Boys are such nuisances. Dont ever have any more boys, Scarlett.

It was on the tip of her tongue to reply tartly that she never intended to have any more babies,boys or girls, but she caught herself in time and smiled, casting about quickly in her mind for sometopic of conversation that would put off the bad moment when the subject she feared would comeup for discussion.

Did you have a nice trip, Rhett? Where did you go this time?

OhCubaNew Orleansother places. Here, Scarlett, take the baby. Shes beginning toslobber and I cant get to my handkerchief. Shes a fine baby, Im sure, but shes wetting my shirtbosom.

She took the child back into her lap and Rhett settled himself lazily on the banister and took acigar from a silver case.

You are always going to New Orleans, she said and pouted a little. And you never will tellme what you do there.

I am a hard-working man, Scarlett, and perhaps my business takes me there.

Hard-working! You! she laughed impertinently. You never worked in your life. Youre toolazy. All you ever do is finance Carpetbaggers in their thieving and take half the profits and bribeYankee officials to let you in on schemes to rob us taxpayers.

He threw back his head and laughed.

And how you would love to have money enough to bribe officials, so you could do likewise!

The very idea She began to ruffle.

But perhaps you will make enough money to get into bribery on a large scale some day. Maybeyoull get rich off those convicts you leased.

Oh, she said, a little disconcerted, how did you find out about my gang so soon?

I arrived last night and spent the evening in the Girl of the Period Saloon, where one hears allthe news of the town. Its a clearing house for gossip. Better than a ladies sewing circle. Everyonetold me that youd leased a gang and put that little plug-ugly, Gallegher, in charge to work them todeath.

Thats a lie, she said angrily. He wont work them to death. Ill see to that

Will you?

Of course I will! How can you even insinuate such things?

Oh, I do beg your pardon, Mrs. Kennedy! I know your motives are always above reproach.

However, Johnnie Gallegher is a cold little bully if I ever saw one. Better watch him or youll behaving trouble when the inspector comes around.

You tend to your business and Ill tend to mine, she said indignantly. And I dont want to talkabout convicts any more. Everybodys been hateful about them. My gang is my own businessAnd you havent told me yet what you do in New Orleans. You go there so often that everybodysays She paused. She had not intended to say so much.

What do they say?

Wellthat you have a sweetheart there. That you are going to get married. Are you, Rhett?

She had been curious about this for so long that she could not refrain from asking the point-blank question. A queer little pang of jealousy jabbed at her at the thought of Rhett getting married,although why that should be she did not know.

His bland eyes grew suddenly alert and he caught her gaze and held it until a little blush crept upinto her cheeks.

Would it matter much to you?

Well, I should hate to lose your friendship, she said primly and, with an attempt atdisinterestedness, bent down to pull the blanket closer about Ella Lorenas head.

He laughed suddenly, shortly, and said: Look at me, Scarlett.

She looked up unwillingly, her blush deepening.

You can tell your curious friends that when I marry it will be because I couldnt get the womanI wanted in any other way. And Ive never yet wanted a woman bad enough to marry her.

Now she was indeed confused and embarrassed, for she remembered the night on this veryporch during the siege when he had said: I am not a marrying man and casually suggested thatshe become his mistressremembered, too, the terrible day when he was in jail and was shamedby the memory. A slow malicious smile went over his face as he read her eyes.

But I will satisfy your vulgar curiosity since you ask such pointed questions. It isnt asweetheart that takes me to New Orleans. Its a child, a little boy.

A little boy! The shock of this unexpected information wiped out her confusion.

Yes, he is my legal ward and I am responsible for him. Hes in school in New Orleans. I gothere frequently to see him.

And take him presents? So, she thought, thats how he always knows what kind of presentsWade likes!

Yes, he said shortly, unwillingly.

Well, I never! Is he handsome?

Too handsome for his own good.

Is he a nice little boy?

No. Hes a perfect hellion. I wish he had never been born. Boys are troublesome creatures. Isthere anything else youd like to know?

He looked suddenly angry and his brow was dark, as though he already regretted speaking of thematter at all.

Well, not if you dont want to tell me any more, she said loftily, though she was burning forfurther information. But I just cant see you in the r.le of a guardian, and she laughed, hoping todisconcert him.

No, I dont suppose you can. Your vision is pretty limited.

He said no more and smoked his cigar in silence for a while. She cast about for some remark asrude as his but could think of none.

I would appreciate it if youd say nothing of this to anyone, he said finally. Though I supposethat asking a woman to keep her mouth shut is asking the impossible.

I can keep a secret, she said with injured dignity.

Can you? Its nice to learn unsuspected things about friends. Now, stop pouting, Scarlett. Imsorry I was rude but you deserved it for prying. Give me a smile and lets be pleasant for a minuteor two before I take up an unpleasant subject.

Oh, dear! she thought. Now, hes going to talk about Ashley and the mill! and she hastened tosmile and show her dimple to divert him. Where else did you go, Rhett? You havent been in NewOrleans all this time, have you?

No, for the last month Ive been in Charleston. My father died.

Oh, Im sorry.

Dont be. Im sure he wasnt sorry to die, and Im sure Im not sorry hes dead.

Rhett, what a dreadful thing to say!

It would be much more dreadful if I pretended to be sorry, when I wasnt, wouldnt it? Therewas never any love lost between us. I cannot remember when the old gentleman did not disapproveof me. I was too much like his own father and he disapproved heartily of his father. And as I grewolder his disapproval of me became downright dislike, which, I admit, I did little to change. All the things Father wanted me to do and be were such boring things. And finally he threw me out intothe world without a cent and no training whatsoever to be anything but a Charleston gentleman, agood pistol shot and an excellent poker player. And he seemed to take it as a personal affront that Idid not starve but put my poker playing to excellent advantage and supported myself royally bygambling. He was so affronted at a Butler becoming a gambler that when I came home for the firsttime, he forbade my mother to see me. And all during the war when I was blockading out ofCharleston, Mother had to lie and slip off to see me. Naturally that didnt increase my love forhim.

Oh, I didnt know all that!

He was what is pointed out as a fine old gentleman of the old school which means that he wasignorant, thick headed, intolerant and incapable of thinking along any lines except what othergentlemen of the old school thought. Everyone admired him tremendously for having cut me offand counted me as dead. If thy right eye offend thee, pluck it out. I was his right eye, his oldestson, and he plucked me out with a vengeance.

He smiled a little, his eyes hard with amused memory.

Well, I could forgive all that but I cant forgive what hes done to Mother and my sister sincethe war ended. Theyve been practically destitute. The plantation house was burned and the ricefields have gone back to marsh lands. And the town house went for taxes and theyve been livingin two rooms that arent fit for darkies. Ive sent money to Mother, but Father has sent it backtainted money, you see!and several times Ive gone to Charleston and given money, on the sly,to my sister. But Father always found out and raised merry hell with her, till her life wasnt worthliving, poor girl. And back the money came to me. I dont know how theyve lived. ... Yes, I doknow. My brothers given what he could, though he hasnt much to give and he wont takeanything from me eitherspeculators money is unlucky money, you see! And the charity of theirfriends. Your Aunt Eulalie, shes been very kind. Shes one of Mothers best friends, you know.

Shes given them clothes and Good God! My mother on charity!

It was one of the few times she had ever seen him with his mask off, his face hard with honesthatred for his father and distress for his mother.

Aunt Lalie! But, good Heavens, Rhett, she hasnt got anything much above what I send her!

Ah, so thats where it comes from! How ill bred of you, my dear, to brag of such a thing in theface of my humiliation. You must let me reimburse you!

With pleasure, said Scarlett, her mouth suddenly twisting into a grin, and he smiled back.

Ah, Scarlett, how the thought of a dollar does make your eyes sparkle! Are you sure youhavent some Scotch or perhaps Jewish blood as well as Irish?

Dont be hateful! I didnt mean to throw it in your face about Aunt Lalie. But honestly, shethinks Im made of money. Shes always writing me for more and, God knows, Ive got enough onmy hands without supporting all of Charleston. What did your father die of?

Genteel starvation, I thinkand hope. It served him right. He was willing to let Mother andRosemary starve with him. Now that hes dead, I can help them. Ive bought them a house on the Battery and theyve servants to look after them. But of course, they couldnt let it be known thatthe money came from me.

Why not?

My dear, surely you know Charleston! Youve visited there. My family may be poor but theyhave a position to uphold. And they couldnt uphold it if it were known that gambling money andspeculators money and Carpetbag money was behind it. No, they gave it out that Father left anenormous life insurancethat hed beggared himself and starved himself to death to keep up thepayments, so that after he died, theyd be provided for. So he is looked upon as an even greatergentleman of the old school than before. ... In fact, a martyr to his family. I hope hes turning in hisgrave at the knowledge that Mother and Rosemary are comfortable now, in spite of his efforts. ...

In a way, Im sorry hes dead because he wanted to die was so glad to die.

Why?

Oh, he really died when Lee surrendered. You know the type. He never could adjust himself tothe new times and spent his time talking about the good old days.

Rhett, are all old folks like that? She was thinking of Gerald and what Will had said abouthim.

Heavens, no! Just look at your Uncle Henry and that old wild cat, Mr. Merriwether, just toname two. They took a new lease on life when they marched out with the Home Guard and itseems to me that theyve gotten younger and more peppery ever since. I met old man Merriwetherthis morning driving Rens pie wagon and cursing the horse like an army mule skinner. He toldme he felt ten years younger since he escaped from the house and his daughter-in-laws coddlingand took to driving the wagon. And your Uncle Henry enjoys fighting the Yankees in court and outand defending the widow and the orphanfree of charge, I fearagainst the Carpetbaggers. Ifthere hadnt been a war, hed have retired long ago and nursed his rheumatism. Theyre youngagain because they are of use again and feel that they are needed. And they like this new day thatgives old men another chance. But there are plenty of people, young people, who feel like myfather and your father. They cant and wont adjust and that brings me to the unpleasant subject Iwant to discuss with you, Scarlett.

His sudden shift so disconcerted her that she stammered: Whatwhat and inwardlygroaned: Oh, Lord! Now, its coming. I wonder if I can butter him down?

I shouldnt have expected either truth or honor or fair dealing from you, knowing you as I do.

But foolishly, I trusted you.

I dont know what you mean.

I think you do. At any rate, you look very guilty. As I was riding along Ivy Street a white ago,on my way to call on you, who should hail me from behind a hedge but Mrs. Ashley Wilkes! Ofcourse, I stopped and chatted with her.

Indeed?

Yes, we had an enjoyable talk. She told me she had always wanted to let me know how braveshe thought I was to have struck a blow for the Confederacy, even at the eleventh hour.

Oh, fiddle-dee-dee! Mellys a fool. She might have died that night because you acted soheroic.

I imagine she would have thought her life given in a good cause. And when I asked her whatshe was doing in Atlanta she looked quite surprised at my ignorance and told me that they wereliving here now and that you had been kind enough to make Mr. Wilkes a partner in your mill.

Well, what of it? questioned Scarlett, shortly.

When I lent you the money to buy that mill I made one stipulation, to which you agreed, andthat was that it should not go to the support of Ashley Wilkes.

You are being very offensive. Ive paid you back your money and I own the mill and what I dowith it is my own business.

Would you mind telling me how you made the money to pay back my loan?

I made it selling lumber, of course.

You made it with the money I lent you to give you your start. Thats what you mean. Mymoney is being used to support Ashley. You are a woman quite without honor and if you hadntrepaid my loan, Id take great pleasure in calling it in now and selling you out at public auction ifyou couldnt pay.

He spoke lightly but there was anger flickering in his eyes.

Scarlett hastily carried the warfare into the enemys territory.

Why do you hate Ashley so much? I believe youre jealous of him.

After she had spoken she could have bitten her tongue, for he threw back his head and laugheduntil she went red with mortification.

Add conceit to dishonor, he said. Youll never get over being the belle of the County, willyou? Youll always think youre the cutest little trick in shoe leather and that every man you meetis expiring for love of you.

I dont either! she cried hotly. But I just cant see why you hate Ashley so much and thatsthe only explanation I can think of.

Well, think something else, pretty charmer, for thats the wrong explanation. And as for hatingAshley I dont hate him any more than I like him. In fact, my only emotion toward him and hiskind is pity.

Pity?

Yes, and a little contempt. Now, swell up like a gobbler and tell me that he is worth a thousandblackguards like me and that I shouldnt dare to be so presumptuous as to feel either pity orcontempt for him. And when you have finished swelling, Ill tell you what I mean, if youreinterested.

Well, Im not.

I shall tell you, just the same, for I cant bear for you to go on nursing your pleasant delusion ofmy jealousy. I pity him because he ought to be dead and he isnt. And I have a contempt for him because he doesnt know what to do with himself now that his world is gone.

There was something familiar in the idea he expressed. She had a confused memory of havingbeard similar words but she could not remember when and where. She did not think very hardabout it for her anger was hot.

If you had your way all the decent men in the South would be dead!

And if they had their way, I think Ashleys kind would prefer to be dead. Dead with neat stonesabove them, saying: Here lies a soldier of the Confederacy, dead for the Southland or Dulce etdecorum est or any of the other popular epitaphs.

I dont see why!

You never see anything that isnt written in letters a foot high and then shoved under your nose,do you? If they were dead, their troubles would be over, thered be no problems to face, problemsthat have no solutions. Moreover, their families would be proud of them through countlessgenerations. And Ive heard the dead are happy. Do you suppose Ashley Wilkes is happy?

Why, of course she began and then she remembered the look in Ashleys eyes recently andstopped.

Is he happy or Hugh Elsing or Dr. Meade? Any more than my father and your father werehappy?

Well, perhaps not as happy as they might be, because theyve all lost their money.

He laughed.

It isnt losing their money, my pet. I tell you its losing their worldthe world they were raisedin. Theyre like fish out of water or cats with wings. They were raised to be certain persons, to docertain things, to occupy certain niches. And those persons and things and niches disappearedforever when General Lee arrived at Appomattox. Oh, Scarlett, dont look so stupid! What is therefor Ashley Wilkes to do, now that his home is gone and his plantation taken up for taxes and finegentlemen are going twenty for a penny? Can he work with his head or his hands? Ill bet youvelost money hand over fist since he took over that mill.

I have not!

How nice. May I look over your books some Sunday evening when you are at leisure?

You can go to the devil and not at your leisure. You can go now, for all I care.

My pet, Ive been to the devil and hes a very dull fellow. I wont go there again, even foryou. ... You took my money when you needed it desperately and you used it. We had an agreementas to how it should be used and you have broken that agreement. Just remember, my precious littlecheat, the time will come when you win want to borrow more money from me. Youll want me tobank you, at some incredibly low interest, so you can buy more mills and more mules and buildmore saloons. And you can whistle for the money.

When I need money Ill borrow it from the bank, thank you, she said coldly, but her breastwas heaving with rage.

Will you? Try to do it. I own plenty of stock in the bank.

You do?

Yes, I am interested in some honest enterprises.

There are other banks

Plenty of them. And if I can manage it, youll play hell getting a cent from any of them. Youcan go to the Carpetbag usurers if you want money.

Ill go to them with pleasure.

Youll go but with little pleasure when you learn their rates of interest. My pretty, there arepenalties in the business world for crooked dealing. You should have played straight with me.

Youre a fine man, arent you? So rich and powerful yet picking on people who are down, likeAshley and me!

Dont put yourself in his class. You arent down. Nothing will down you. But he is down andhell stay there unless theres some energetic person behind him, guiding and protecting him aslong as he lives. Im of no mind to have my money used for the benefit of such a person.

You didnt mind helping me and I was down and

You were a good risk, my dear, an interesting risk. Why? Because you didnt plump yourselfdown on your male relatives and sob for the old days. You got out and hustled and now yourfortunes are firmly planted on money stolen from a dead mans wallet and money stolen from theConfederacy. Youve got murder to your credit, and husband stealing, attempted fornication, lyingand sharp dealing and any amount of chicanery that wont bear close inspection. Admirable things,all of them. They show you to be a person of energy and determination and a good money risk. Itsentertaining, helping people who help themselves. Id lend ten thousand dollars without even anote to that old Roman matron, Mrs. Merriwether. She started with a basket of pies and look at hernow! A bakery employing half a dozen people, old Grandpa happy with his delivery wagon andthat lazy little Creole, Ren, working hard and liking it. ... Or that poor devil, Tommy Wellburn,who does two mens work with half a mans body and does it well orwell, I wont go on andbore you.

You do bore me. You bore me to distraction, said Scarlett coldly, hoping to annoy him anddivert him from the ever-unfortunate subject of Ashley. But he only laughed shortly and refused totake up the gauntlet.

People like them are worth helping. But Ashley Wilkesbah! His breed is of no use or value inan upside-down world like ours. Whenever the world up-ends, his kind is the first to perish. Andwhy not? They dont deserve to survive because they wont fightdont know how to fight. Thisisnt the first time the worlds been upside down and it wont be the last. Its happened before anditll happen again. And when it does happen, everyone loses everything and everyone is equal. Andthen they all start again at taw, with nothing at all. That is, nothing except the cunning of theirbrains and strength of their hands. But some people, like Ashley, have neither cunning nor strengthor, having them, scruple to use them. And so they go under and they should go under. Its a naturallaw and the world is better off without them. But there are always a hardy few who come through and given time, they are right back where they were before the world turned over.

Youve been poor! You just said that your father turned you out without a penny! said Scarlett,furious. I should think youd understand and sympathize with Ashley!

I do understand; said Rhett, but Im damned if I sympathize. After the surrender Ashley hadmuch more than I had when I was thrown out. At least, he had friends who took him in, whereas Iwas Ishmael. But what has Ashley done with himself?

If you are comparing him with yourself, you conceited thing, why Hes not like you, thankGod! He wouldnt soil his hands as you do, making money with Carpetbaggers and Scalawags andYankees. Hes scrupulous and honorable!

But not too scrupulous and honorable to take aid and money from a woman.

What else could he have done?

Who am I to say? I only know what I did, both when I was thrown out and nowadays. I onlyknow what other men have done. We saw opportunity in the ruin of a civilization and we made themost of our opportunity, some honestly, some shadily, and we are still making the most of it. Butthe Ashleys of this world have the same chances and dont take them. They just arent smart,Scarlett, and only the smart deserve to survive.

She hardly heard what he was saying, for now there was coming back to her the exact memorywhich had teased her a few minutes before when he first began speaking. She remembered the coldwind that swept the orchard of Tara and Ashley standing by a pile of rails, his eyes looking beyondher. And he had saidwhat? Some funny foreign name that sounded like profanity and had talkedof the end of the world. She had not known what he meant then but now bewilderedcomprehension was coming to her and with it a sick, weary feeling.

Why, Ashley said

Yes?

Once at Tara he said something about theadusk of the gods and about the end of the worldand some such foolishness.

Ah, the G.tterd.mmerung! Rhetts eyes were sharp with interest. And what else?

Oh, I dont remember exactly. I wasnt paying much mind. Butyessomething about thestrong coining through and the weak being winnowed out.

Ah, so he knows. Then that makes it harder for him. Most of them dont know and will neverknow. Theyll wonder all their lives where the lost enchantment has vanished. Theyll simplysuffer in proud and incompetent silence. But he understands. He knows hes winnowed out.

Oh, he isnt! Not while Ive got breath in my body.

He looked at her quietly and his brown face was smooth.

Scarlett, how did you manage to get his consent to come to Atlanta and take over the mill? Didhe struggle very hard against you?

She had a quick memory of the scene with Ashley after Geralds funeral and put it from her.

Why, of course not, she replied indignantly. When I explained to him that I needed his helpbecause I didnt trust that scamp who was running the mill and Frank was too busy to help me andI was going towell, there was Ella Lorena, you see. He was very glad to help me out.

Sweet are the uses of motherhood! So thats how you got around him. Well, youve got himwhere you want him now, poor devil, as shackled to you by obligations as any of your convicts areby their chains. And I wish you both joy. But, as I said at the beginning of this discussion, youllnever get another cent out of me for any of your little unladylike schemes, my double-dealinglady.

She was smarting with anger and with disappointment as well. For some time she had beenplanning to borrow more money from Rhett to buy a lot downtown and start a lumber yard there.

I can do without your money, she cried. Im making money out of Johnnie Galleghers mill,plenty of it, now that I dont use free darkies and I have some money out on mortgages and we arecoining cash at the store from the darky trade.

Yes, so I heard. How clever of you to rook the helpless and the widow and the orphan and theignorant! But if you must steal, Scarlett, why not steal from the rich and strong instead of the poorand weak? From Robin Hood on down to now, thats been considered highly moral.

Because, said Scarlett shortly, its a sight easier and safer to stealas you call itfrom thepoor.

He laughed silently, his shoulders shaking.

Youre a fine honest rogue, Scarlett!

A rogue! Queer that that term should hurt. She wasnt a rogue, she told herself vehemently. Atleast, that wasnt what she wanted to be. She wanted to be a great lady. For a moment her mindwent swiftly down the years and she saw her mother, moving with a sweet swish of skirts and afaint fragrance of sachet, her small busy hands tireless in the service of others, loved, respected,cherished. And suddenly her heart was sick.

If you are trying to devil me, she said tiredly, its no use. I know Im not asscrupulous as Ishould be these days. Not as kind and as pleasant as I was brought up to be. But I cant help it,Rhett. Truly, I cant. What else could I have done? What would have happened to me, to Wade, toTara and all of us if Id beengentle when that Yankee came to Tara? I should have beenbut Idont even want to think of that. And when Jonas Wilkerson was going to take the home place,suppose Id beenkind and scrupulous? Where would we all be now? And if Id been sweet andsimple minded and not nagged Frank about bad debts wedoh, well. Maybe I am a rogue, but Iwont be a rogue forever, Rhett. But during these past yearsand even nowwhat else could Ihave done? How else could I have acted? Ive felt that I was trying to row a heavily loaded boat ina storm. Ive had so much trouble just trying to keep afloat that I couldnt be bothered about thingsthat didnt matter, things I could part with easily and not miss, like good manners andwell,things like that. Ive been too afraid my boat would be swamped and so Ive dumped overboard thethings that seemed least important.

Pride and honor and truth and virtue and kindliness, he enumerated silkily. You are right,Scarlett. They arent important when a boat is sinking. But look around you at your friends. Either they are bringing their boats ashore safely with cargoes intact or they are content to go down withall flags flying.

They are a passel of fools, she said shortly. Theres a time for all things. When Ive gotplenty of money, Ill be nice as you please, too. Butter wont melt in my mouth. I can afford to bethen.

You can afford to bebut you wont. Its hard to salvage jettisoned cargo and, if it is retrieved,its usually irreparably damaged. And I fear that when you can afford to fish up the honor andvirtue and kindness youve thrown overboard, youll find they have suffered a sea change and not,I fear, into something rich and strange. ...

He rose suddenly and picked up his hat.

You are going?

Yes. Arent you relieved? I leave you to what remains of your conscience.

He paused and looked down at the baby, putting out a finger for the child to grip.

I suppose Frank is bursting with pride?

Oh, of course.

Has a lot of plans for this baby, I suppose?

Oh, well, you know how silly men are about their babies.

Then, tell him, said Rhett and stopped short, an odd look on his face, tell him if he wants tosee his plans for his child work out, hed better stay home at night more often than hes doing.

What do you mean?

Just what I say. Tell him to stay home.

Oh, you vile creature! To insinuate that poor Frank would

Oh, good Lord! Rhett broke into a roar of laughter. I didnt mean he was running around withwomen! Frank! Oh, good Lord!

He went down the steps still laughing.

Chapter 44

THE MARCH AFTERNOON was windy and cold, and Scarlett pulled the lap robe high underher arms as she drove out the Decatur road toward Johnnie Galleghers mill. Driving alone washazardous these days and she knew it, more hazardous than ever before, for now the negroes werecompletely out of hand. As Ashley had prophesied, there had been hell to pay since the legislaturerefused to ratify the amendment. The stout refusal had been like a slap in the face of the furiousNorth and retaliation had come swiftly. The North was determined to force the negro vote on thestate and, to this end, Georgia had been declared in rebellion and put under the strictest martial law.

Georgias very existence as a state had been wiped out and it had become, with Florida andAlabama, Military District Number Three, under the command of a Federal general.

If life had been insecure and frightening before this, it was doubly so now. The militaryregulations which had seemed so stringent the year before were now mild by comparison with theones issued by General Pope. Confronted with the prospect of negro rule, the future seemed darkand hopeless, and the embittered state smarted and writhed helplessly. As for the negroes, theirnew importance went to their heads, and, realizing that they had the Yankee Army behind them,their outrages increased. No one was safe from them.

In this wild and fearful time, Scarlett was frightenedfrightened but determined, and she stillmade her rounds alone, with Franks pistol tucked in the upholstery of the buggy. She silentlycursed the legislature for bringing this worse disaster upon them all. What good had it done, thisfine brave stand, this gesture which everyone called gallant? It had just made matters so muchworse.

As she drew near the path that led down through the bare trees into the creek bottom where theShantytown settlement was, she clucked to the horse to quicken his speed. She always felt uneasydriving past this dirty, sordid cluster of discarded army tents and slave cabins. It had the worstreputation of any spot in or near Atlanta, for here lived in filth outcast negroes, black prostitutesand a scattering of poor whites of the lowest order. It was rumored to be the refuge of negro andwhite criminals and was the first place the Yankee soldiers searched when they wanted a man.

Shootings and cuttings went on here with such regularity that the authorities seldom troubled toinvestigate and generally left the Shantytowners to settle their own dark affairs. Back in the woodsthere was a still that manufactured a cheap quality of corn whisky and, by night, the cabins in thecreek bottoms resounded with drunken yells and curses.

Even the Yankees admitted that it was a plague spot and should be wiped out, but they took nosteps in this direction. Indignation was loud among the inhabitants of Atlanta and Decatur whowere forced to use the road for travel between the two towns. Men went by Shantytown with theirpistols loosened in their holsters and nice women never willingly passed it, even under theprotection of their men, for usually there were drunken negro slatterns sitting along the road,hurling insults and shouting coarse words.

As long as she had Archie beside her, Scarlett had not given Shantytown a thought, because noteven the most impudent negro woman dared laugh in her presence. But since she had been forcedto drive alone, there had been any number of annoying, maddening incidents. The negro slutsseemed to try themselves whenever she drove by. There was nothing she could do except ignorethem and boil with rage. She could not even take comfort in airing her troubles to her neighbors orfamily because the neighbors would say triumphantly: Well, what else did you expect? And herfamily would take on dreadfully again and try to stop her. And she had no intention of stopping hertrips.

Thank Heaven, there were no ragged women along the roadside today! As she passed the trailleading down to the settlement she looked with distaste at the group of shacks squatting in thehollow in the dreary slant of the afternoon sun. There was a chill wind blowing, and as she passedthere came to her nose the mingled smells of wood smoke, frying pork and untended privies.

Averting her nose, she flapped the reins smartly across the horses back and hurried him past andaround the bend of the road.

Just as she was beginning to draw a breath of relief, her heart rose in her throat with suddenfright, for a huge negro slipped silently from behind a large oak tree. She was frightened but notenough to lose her wits and, in an instant, the horse was pulled up and she had Franks pistol in herhand.

What do you want? she cried with all the sternness she could muster. The big negro duckedback behind the oak, and the voice that answered was frightened.

Lawd, Miss Scarlett, doan shoot Big Sam!

Big Sam! For a moment she could not take in his words. Big Sam, the foreman of Tara whomshe had seen last in the days of the siege. What on earth ...

Come out of there and let me see if you are really Sam!

Reluctantly he slid out of his hiding place, a giant ragged figure, bare-footed, clad in denimbreeches and a blue Union uniform jacket that was far too short and tight for his big frame. Whenshe saw it was really Big Sam, she shoved the pistol down into the upholstery and smiled withpleasure.

Oh, Sam! How nice to see you!

Sam galloped over to the buggy, his eyes rolling with joy and his white teeth flashing, andclutched her outstretched hand with two black hands as big as hams. His watermelon-pink tonguelapped out, his whole body wiggled and his joyful contortions were as ludicrous as the gambolingsof a mastiff.

Mah Lawd, it sho is good ter see some of de fambly agin! he cried, scrunching her hand untilshe felt that the bones would crack. Huccome you got so mean lak, totin a gun, Miss Scarlett?

So many mean folks these days, Sam, that I have to tote it. What on earth are you doing in anasty place like Shantytown, you, a respectable darky? And why havent you been into town to seeme?

Lawm, Miss Scarlett, Ah doan lib in Shantytown. Ah jes bidin hyah fer a spell. Ah wouldn

lib in dat place for nuthin. Ah nebber in mah life seed sech trashy niggers. An Ah din know youwuz in Lanta. Ah thought you wuz at Tara. Ah wuz aimin ter come home ter Tara soon as Ah gotde chance.

Have you been living in Atlanta ever since the siege?

No, Mam! Ah been trabelin! He released her hand and she painfully flexed it to see if thebones were intact.  Member wen you seed me las?

Scarlett remembered the hot day before the siege began when she and Rhett had sat in thecarriage and the gang of negroes with Big Sam at their head had marched down the dusty streettoward the entrenchments singing Go Down, Moses. She nodded.

Wel, Ah wuked lak a dawg diggin bresswuks an fillin san bags, tell de Confedruts lef Lanta.

De capn gempmum whut had me in charge, he wuz kilt an dar warnt nobody ter tell Big Samwhut ter do, so Ah jes lay low in de bushes. Ah thought Ahd try ter git home ter Tara, but den Ahhear dat all de country roun Tara done buhnt up. Sides, Ah din hab no way ter git back an Ah wuz sceered de patterollers pick me up, kase Ah din hab no pass. Den de Yankees come in an aYankee gempmum, he wuz a cunnel, he tek a shine ter me an he keep me te ten ter his hawse an

his boots.

Yas, Mam! Ah sho did feel bigitty, bein a body serbant lak Poke, wen Ah ain nuthin but afeel han. Ah ain tell de Cunnel Ah wuz a feel han an he Well, Miss Scarlett, Yankees isiggerunt folks! He din know de diffunce! So Ah stayed wid him an Ah went ter Sabannah widhim wen Ginul Sherman went dar, an fo Gawd, Miss Scarlett, Ah nebber seed sech awful goinonsas Ah seed on de way ter Sabannah! A-stealin an a-buhnindid dey buhn Tara, MissScarlett?

They set fire to it, but we put it out.

Wellm, Ah sho glad ter hear dat. Tara mah home an Ah is aimin ter go back dar. An wen dewah ober, de Cunnel he say ter me: You Sam! You come on back Nawth wid me. Ah pay yougood wages. Wellm, lak all de niggers, Ah wuz honin ter try disyere freedom fo Ah went home,so Ah goes Nawth wid de Cunnel. Yasm, us went ter Washington an Noo Yawk an den terBawston whar de Cunnel lib. Yas, Maam, Ahs a trabeled nigger! Miss Scarlett, dars mo hawsesand cahiges on dem Yankee streets dan you kin shake a stick at! Ah wuz sceered all de time Ahwuz gwine git runned ober!

Did you like it up North, Sam?

Sam scratched his woolly head.

Ah didan Ah dint. De Cunnel, he a mighty fine man an he unnerstan niggers. But his wife,she sumpin else. His wife, she call me Mister fust time she seed me. Yasm, she do dat an Ahlak ter drap in mah tracks wen she do it. De Cunnel, he tell her ter call me Sam an den she do it.

But all dem Yankee folks, fust time dey meet me, dey call me Mist OHara. An dey ast mer terset down wid dem, lak Ah wuz jes as good as dey wuz. Well, Ah ain nebber set down wid witefolks an Ah is too ole ter learn. Dey treat me lak Ah jes as good as dey wuz, Miss Scarlett, but indere hearts, dey din lak medey din lak no niggers. An dey wuz sceered of me, kase Ahs sobig. An dey wuz allus astin me bout de blood houns dat chase me an de beatins Ah got. An,Lawd, Miss Scarlett, Ah ain nebber got no beatins! You know Mist Gerald ain gwine let nobodybeat a spensive nigger lak me!

Wen Ah tell dem dat an tell dem how good Miss Ellen ter de niggers, an how she set up awhole week wid me wen Ah had de pneumony, dey doan blieve me. An, Miss Scarlett, Ah gotter honin fer Miss Ellen an Tara, tell it look lak Ah kain stan it no longer, an one night Ah lit outfer home, anAh rid de freight cahs all de way down ter Lanta. Ef you buy me a ticket ter Tara, Ahsho be glad ter git home. Ah sho be glad ter see Miss Ellen and Mist Gerald agin. Ah done hadnuff freedom. Ah wants somebody ter feed me good vittles reglar, and tell me whut ter do an

whut not ter do, an look affer me wen Ah gits sick. Spose Ah gits de pneumony agin? Is datYankee lady gwine tek keer of me? No, Mam! She gwine call me Mist OHara but she ain

gwine nuss me. But Miss Ellen, she gwine nuss me, do Ah git sick anwhuts de mattuh, MissScarlett?

Pa and Mother are both dead, Sam.

Daid? Is you funnin wid me, Miss Scarlett? Dat ain no way ter treat me!

Im not funning. Its true. Mother died when Sherman men came through Tara and Pahewent last June. Oh, Sam, dont cry. Please dont! If you do, Ill cry too. Sam, dont! I just cantstand it. Lets dont talk about it now. Ill tell you all about it some other time. ... Miss Suellen is atTara and shes married to a mighty fine man, Mr. Will Benteen. And Miss Carreen, shes in a

Scarlett paused. She could never make plain to the weeping giant what a convent was. Shesliving in Charleston now. But Pork and Prissy are at Tara. ... There, Sam, wipe your nose. Do youreally want to go home?

Yasm but it ain gwine be lak Ah thought wid Miss Ellen an

Sam, howd you like to stay here in Atlanta and work for me? I need a driver and I need onebad with so many mean folks around these days.

Yasm, You sho do. Ah been aimin ter say you ain got no bizness drivin round by yoseff,Miss Scarlett You ain got no notion how mean some niggers is dese days, specially dem whut livehyah in Shantytown. It ain safe fer you. Ah ain been in Shantytown but two days, but Ah heardem talk bout you. An yesterday wen you druv by an dem trashy black wenches holler at you,Ah recernize you but you went by so fas Ah couldn ketch you. But Ah sho tan de hides of demniggers! Ah sho did. Ain you notice dar ain none of dem roun hyah terday?

I did notice and I certainly thank you, Sam. Well, how would you like to be my carriage man?

Miss Scarlett, thankee, Mam, but Ah specs Ah better go ter Tara.

Big Sam looked down and his bare toe traced aimless marks in the road. There was a furtiveuneasiness about him.

Now, why? Ill pay you good wages. You must stay with me.

The big black face, stupid and as easily read as a childs, looked up at her and there was fear init. He came closer and, leaning over the side of the buggy, whispered: Miss Scarlett, Ah got ter gitouter Lanta. Ah got ter git ter Tara whar dey woan fine me. AhAh done kilt a man.

A darky?

Nom. A wite man. A Yankee sojer and deys lookin fer me. Dat de reason Ahm hyah atShantytown.

How did it happen?

He wuz drunk an he said sumpin Ah couldn tek noways an Ah got mah hans on his neckan Ah din mean ter kill him, Miss Scarlett, but mah hans is powful strong, an fo Ah knowed it,he wuz kilt. An Ah wuz so sceered Ah din know whut ter do! So Ah come out hyah ter hide an

wen Ah seed you go by yestiddy, Ah says Bress Gawd! Dar Miss Scarlett! She tek keer of me.

She ain gwine let de Yankees git me. She sen me back ter Tara.

You say theyre after you? They know you did it?

Yasm, Ahs so big dar ain no mistakin me. Ah spec Ahs de bigges nigger in Lanta. Deydone been out hyah already affer me las night but a nigger gal, she hid me in a cabe ober in dewoods, tell dey wuz gone.

Scarlett sat frowning for a moment. She was not in the least alarmed or distressed that Sam hadcommitted murder, but she was disappointed that she could not have him as a driver. A big negrolike Sam would be as good a bodyguard as Archie. Well, she must get him safe to Tara somehow,for of course the authorities must not get him. He was too valuable a darky to be hanged. Why, hewas the best foreman Tara had ever had! It did not enter Scarletts mind that he was free. He stillbelonged to her, like Pork and Mammy and Peter and Cookie and Prissy. He was still one of ourfamily and, as such, must be protected.

Ill send you to Tara tonight, she said finally. Now Sam, Ive got to drive out the road apiece, but I ought to be back here before sundown. You be waiting here for me when I come back.

Dont tell anyone where you are going and if youve got a hat, bring it along to hide your face.

Ah ain got no hat.

Well, heres a quarter. You buy a hat from one of those shanty darkies and meet me here.

Yasm. His face glowed with relief at once more having someone to tell him what to do.

Scarlett drove on thoughtfully. Will would certainly welcome a good field hand at Tara. Porkhad never been any good in the fields and never would be any good. With Sam on the place, Porkcould come to Atlanta and join Dilcey as she had promised him when Gerald died.

When she reached the mill the sun was setting and it was later than she cared to be out. JohnnieGallegher was standing in the doorway of the miserable shack that served as cook room for thelittle lumber camp. Sitting on a log in front of the slab-sided shack that was their sleeping quarterswere four of the five convicts Scarlett had apportioned to Johnnies mill. Their convict uniformswere dirty and foul with sweat, shackles clanked between their ankles when they moved tiredly,and there was an air of apathy and despair about them. They were a thin, unwholesome lot, Scarlettthought, peering sharply at them, and when she had leased them, so short a time before, they werean upstanding crew. They did not even raise their eyes as she dismounted from the buggy butJohnnie turned toward her, carelessly dragging off his hat. His little brown face was as hard as anut as he greeted her.

I dont like the look of the men, she said abruptly. They dont look well. Wheres the otherone?

Says hes sick, said Johnnie laconically. Hes in the bunk house.

What ails him?

Laziness, mostly.

Ill go see him.

Dont do that. Hes probably nekkid. Ill tend to him. Hell be back at work tomorrow.

Scarlett hesitated and saw one of the convicts raise a weary head and give Johnnie a stare ofintense hatred before he looked at the ground again.

Have you been whipping these men?

Now, Mrs. Kennedy, begging your pardon, whos running this mill? You put me in charge andtold me to run it. You said Id have a free hand. You aint got no complaints to make of me, have you? Aint I making twice as much for you as Mr. Elsing did?

Yes, you are, said Scarlett, but a shiver went over her, like a goose walking across her grave.

There was something sinister about this camp with its ugly shacks, something which had notbeen here when Hugh Elsing had it. There was a loneliness, an isolation, about it that chilled her.

These convicts far away from everything, so completely at the mercy of Johnnie Gallegher,andifhec(were) hos(so) e to whip them or otherwise mistreat them, she would probably neverknow about it. The convicts would be afraid to complain to her for fear of worse punishment aftershe was gone.

The men look thin. Are you giving them enough to eat? God knows, I spend enough money ontheir food to make them fat as hogs. The flour and pork alone cost thirty dollars last month. Whatare you giving them for supper?

She stepped over to the cook shack and looked in. A fat mulatto woman, who was leaning over arusty old stove, dropped a half curtsy as she saw Scarlett and went on stirring a pot in which black-eyed peas were cooking. Scarlett knew Johnnie Gallegher lived with her but thought it best toignore the fact. She saw that except for the peas and a pan of corn pone there was no other foodbeing prepared.

Havent you got anything else for these men?

Nom.

Havent you got any side meat in these peas?

Nom.

No boiling bacon in the peas? But black-eyed peas are no good without bacon. Theres nostrength to them. Why isnt there any bacon?

Mist Johnnie, he say dar ain no use puttin in no side meat.

Youll put bacon in. Where do you keep your supplies?

The negro woman rolled frightened eyes toward the small closet that served as a pantry andScarlett threw the door open. There was an open barrel of cornmeal on the floor, a small sack offlour, a pound of coffee, a little sugar, a gallon jug of sorghum and two hams. One of the hamssitting on the shelf had been recently cooked and only one or two slices had been cut from it,Scarlett turned in a fury on Johnnie Gallegher and met his coldly angry gaze.

Where are the five sacks of white flour I sent out last week? And the sugar sack and the coffee?

And I had five hams sent and ten pounds of side meat and God knows how many bushels of yamsand Irish potatoes. Well, where are they? You cant have used them all in a week if you fed the menfive meals a day. Youve sold them! Thats what youve done, you thief! Sold my good suppliesand put the money in your pocket and fed these men on dried peas and corn pone. No wonder theylook so thin. Get out of the way.

She stormed past him to the doorway.

You, man, there on the endyes, you! Come here!

The man rose and walked awkwardly toward her, his shackles clanking, and she saw that hisbare ankles were red and raw from the chafing of the iron.

When did you last have ham?

The man looked down at the ground.

Speak up.

Still the man stood silent and abject. Finally he raised his eyes, looked Scarlett in the faceimploringly and dropped his gaze again.

Scared to talk, eh? Well, go in the pantry and get that ham off the shelf. Rebecca, give him yourknife. Take it out to those men and divide it up. Rebecca, make some biscuits and coffee for themen. And serve plenty of sorghum. Start now, so I can see you do it.

Dats Mist Johnnies privut flour an coffee, Rebecca muttered frightenedly.

Mr. Johnnies, my foot! I suppose its his private ham too. You do what I say. Get busy. JohnnieGallegher, come out to the buggy with me.

She stalked across the littered yard and climbed into the buggy, noticing with grim satisfactionthat the men were tearing at the ham and cramming bits into their mouths voraciously. They lookedas if they feared it would be taken from them at any minute.

You are a rare scoundrel! she cried furiously to Johnnie as he stood at the wheel, his hatpushed back from his lowering brow. And you can just hand over to me the price of my supplies.

In the future, Ill bring you provisions every day instead of ordering them by the month. Then youcant cheat me.

In the future I wont be here, said Johnnie Gallegher.

You mean you are quitting!

For a moment it was on Scarletts hot tongue to cry: Go and good riddance! but the cool handof caution stopped her. If Johnnie should quit, what would she do? He had been doubling theamount of lumber Hugh turned out. And just now she had a big order, the biggest she had ever hadand a rush order at that. She had to get that lumber into Atlanta. If Johnnie quit, whom would sheget to take over the mill?

Yes, Im quitting. You put me in complete charge here and you told me that all you expected ofme was as much lumber as I could possibly get out. You didnt tell me how to run my businessthen and Im not aiming to have you start now. How I get the lumber out is no affair of yours. Youcant complain that Ive fallen down on my bargain. Ive made money for you and Ive earned mysalaryand what I could pick up on the side, too. And here you come out here, interfering, askingquestions and breaking my authority in front of the men. How can you expect me to keepdiscipline after this? What if the men do get an occasional lick? The lazy scum deserve worse.

What if they aint fed up and pampered? They dont deserve nothing better. Either you tend to yourbusiness and let me tend to mine or I quit tonight.

His hard little face looked flintier than ever and Scarlett was in a quandary. If he quit tonight,what would she do? She couldnt stay here all night guarding the convicts!

Something of her dilemma showed in her eyes for Johnnies expression changed subtly andsome of the hardness went out of his face. There was an easy agreeable note in his voice when hespoke.

Its getting late, Mrs. Kennedy, and youd better be getting on home. We aint going to fall outover a little thing like this, are we? Spose you take ten dollars out of my next months wages andlets call it square.

Scarletts eyes went unwillingly to the miserable group gnawing on the ham and she thought ofthe sick man lying in the windy shack. She ought to get rid of Johnnie Gallegher. He was a thiefand a brutal man. There was no telling what he did to the convicts when she wasnt there. But, onthe other hand, he was smart and, God knows, she needed a smart man. Well, she couldnt partwith him now. He was making money for her. Shed just have to see to it that the convicts got theirproper rations in the future.

Ill take twenty dollars out of your wages, she said shortly, and Ill be back and discuss thematter further in the morning.

She picked up the reins. But she knew there would be no further discussion. She knew that thematter had ended there and she knew Johnnie knew it.

As she drove off down the path to the Decatur road her conscience battled with her desire formoney. She knew she had no business exposing human lives to the hard little mans mercies. If heshould cause the death of one of them she would be as guilty as he was, for she had kept him incharge after learning of his brutalities. But on the other handwell, on the other hand, men had nobusiness getting to be convicts. If they broke laws and got caught, then they deserved what theygot. This partly salved her conscience but as she drove down the road the dull thin faces of theconvicts would keep coming back into her mind.

Oh, Ill think of them later, she decided, and pushed the thought into the lumber room of hermind and shut the door upon it.

The sun had completely gone when she reached the bend in the road above Shantytown and thewoods about her were dark. With the disappearance of the sun, a bitter chill had fallen on thetwilight world and a cold wind blew through the dark woods, making the bare boughs crack andthe dead leaves rustle. She had never been out this late by herself and she was uneasy and wishedherself home.

Big Sam was nowhere to be seen and, as she drew rein to wait for him, she worried about hisabsence, fearing the Yankees might have already picked him up. Then she heard footsteps comingup the path from the settlement and a sigh of relief went through her lips. Shed certainly dressSam down for keeping her waiting.

But it wasnt Sam who came round the bend.

It was a big ragged white man and a squat black negro with shoulders and chest like a gorilla.

Swiftly she flapped the reins on the horses back and clutched the pistol. The horse started to trotand suddenly shied as the white man threw up his hand.

Lady, he said, can you give me a quarter? Im sure hungry.

Get out of the way, she answered, keeping her voice as steady as she could. I havent got anymoney. Giddap.

With a sudden swift movement the mans hand was on the horses bridle.

Grab her! he shouted to the negro. Shes probably got her money in her bosom!

What happened next was like a nightmare to Scarlett, and it all happened so quickly. Shebrought up her pistol swiftly and some instinct told her not to fire at the white man for fear ofshooting the horse. As the negro came running to the buggy, his black face twisted in a leeringgrin, she fired point-blank at him. Whether or not she hit him, she never knew, but the next minutethe pistol was wrenched from her hand by a grasp that almost broke her wrist. The negro wasbeside her, so close that she could smell the rank odor of him as he tried to drag her over the buggyside. With her one free hand she fought madly, clawing at his face, and then she felt his big hand ather throat and, with a ripping noise, her basque was torn open from neck to waist. Then the blackhand fumbled between her breasts, and terror and revulsion such as she had never known cameover her and she screamed like an insane woman.

Shut her up! Drag her out! cried the white man, and the black hand fumbled across Scarlettsface to her mouth. She bit as savagely as she could and then screamed again, and through herscreaming she heard the white man swear and realized that there was a third man in the dark road.

The black hand dropped from her mouth and the negro leaped away as Big Sam charged at him.

Run, Miss Scarlett! yelled Sam, grappling with the negro; and Scarlett, shaking andscreaming, clutched up the reins and whip and laid them both over the horse. It went off at a jumpand she felt the wheels pass over something soft, something resistant. It was the white man wholay in the road where Sam had knocked him down.

Maddened by terror, she lashed the horse again and again and it struck a gait that made thebuggy rock and sway. Through her terror she was conscious of the sound of feet running behindher and she screamed at the horse to go faster. If that black ape got her again, she would die beforehe even got his hands upon her.

A voice yelled behind her: Miss Scarlett! Stop!

Without slacking, she looked trembling over her shoulder and saw Big Sam racing down theroad behind her, his long legs working like hard-driven pistons. She drew rein as he came up andhe flung himself into the buggy, his big body crowding her to one side. Sweat and blood werestreaming down his face as he panted:

Is you hut? Did dey hut you?

She could not speak, but seeing the direction of his eyes and their quick averting, she realizedthat her basque was open to the waist and her bare bosom and corset cover were showing. With ashaking hand she clutched the two edges together and bowing her head began to cry in terrifiedsobs.

Gimme dem lines, said Sam, snatching the reins from her. Hawse, mek tracks!

The whip cracked and the startled horse went off at a wild gallop that threatened to throw the buggy into the ditch.

Ah hope Ah done kill dat black baboon. But Ah din wait ter fine out, he panted. But ef hehahmed you, Miss Scarlett, Ahll go back an mek sho of it.

Nonodrive on quickly, she sobbed.

Chapter 45

THAT NIGHT when Frank deposited her and Aunt Pitty and the children at Melanies and rodeoff down the street with Ashley, Scarlett could have burst with rage and hurt. How could he go offto a political meeting on this of all nights in the world? A political meeting! And on the same nightwhen she had been attacked, when anything might have happened to her! It was unfeeling andselfish of him. But then, he had taken the whole affair with maddening calm, ever since Sam hadcarried her sobbing into the house, her basque gaping to the waist. He hadnt clawed his beardeven once when she cried out her story. He had just questioned gently: Sugar, are you hurtorjust scared?

Wrath mingling with her tears she had been unable to answer and Sam had volunteered that shewas just scared.

Ah got dar fo dey done mon tar her dress.

Youre a good boy, Sam, and I wont forget what youve done. If theres anything I can do foryou

Yassah, you kin sen me ter Tara, quick as you kin. De Yankees is affer me.

Frank had listened to this statement calmly too, and had asked no questions. He had looked verymuch as he did the night Tony came beating on their door, as though this was an exclusivelymasculine affair and one to be handled with a minimum of words and emotions.

You go get in the buggy. Ill have Peter drive you as far as Rough and Ready tonight and youcan hide in the woods till morning and then catch the train to Jonesboro. Itll be safer. ... Now,Sugar, stop crying. Its all over now and you arent really hurt. Miss Pitty, could I have yoursmelling salts? And Mammy, fetch Miss Scarlett a glass of wine.

Scarlett had burst into renewed tears, this time tears of rage. She wanted comforting,indignation, threats of vengeance. She would even have preferred him storming at her, saying thatthis was just what he had warned her would happenanything rather than have him take it all socasually and treat her danger as a matter of small moment. He was nice and gentle, of course, butin an absent way as if he had something far more important on his mind.

And that important thing had turned out to be a small political meeting!

She could hardly believe her ears when he told her to change her dress and get ready for him toescort her over to Melanies for the evening. He must know how harrowing her experience hadbeen, must know she did not want to spend an evening at Melanies when her tired body andjangled nerves cried out for the warm relaxation of bed and blanketswith a hot brick to make hertoes tingle and a hot toddy to soothe her fears. If he really loved her, nothing could have forced him from her side on this of all nights. He would have stayed home and held her hand and told herover and over that he would have died if anything had happened to her. And when he came hometonight and she had him alone, she would certainly tell him so.

Melanies small parlor looked as serene as it usually did on nights when Frank and Ashley wereaway and the women gathered together to sew. The room was warm and cheerful in the firelight.

The lamp on the table shed a quiet yellow glow on the four smooth heads bent to their needlework.

Four skirts billowed modestly, eight small feet were daintily placed on low hassocks. The quietbreathing of Wade, Ella and Beau came through the open door of the nursery. Archie sat on a stoolby the hearth, his back against the fireplace, his cheek distended with tobacco, whittlingindustriously on a bit of wood. The contrast between the dirty, hairy old man and the four neat,fastidious ladies was as great as though he were a grizzled, vicious old watchdog and they foursmall kittens.

Melanies soft voice, tinged with indignation, went on and on as she told of the recent outburstof temperament on the part of the Lady Harpists. Unable to agree with the Gentlemens Glee Clubas to the program for their next recital, the ladies had waited on Melanie that afternoon andannounced their intention of withdrawing completely from the Musical Circle. It had taken all ofMelanies diplomacy to persuade them to defer their decision.

Scarlett, overwrought, could have screamed: Oh, damn the Lady Harpists! She wanted to talkabout her dreadful experience. She was bursting to relate it in detail, so she could ease her ownfright by frightening the others. She wanted to tell how brave she had been, just to assure herselfby the sound of her own words that she had, indeed, been brave. But every time she brought up thesubject, Melanie deftly steered the conversation into other and innocuous channels. This irritatedScarlett almost beyond endurance. They were as mean as Frank.

How could they be so calm and placid when she had just escaped so terrible a fate? Theywerent even displaying common courtesy in denying her the relief of talking about it.

The events of the afternoon had shaken her more than she cared to admit, even to herself. Everytime she thought of that malignant black face peering at her from the shadows of the twilight forestroad, she fell to trembling. When she thought of the black hand at her bosom and what would havehappened if Big Sam had not appeared, she bent her head lower and squeezed her eyes tightly shut.

The longer she sat silent in the peaceful room, trying to sew, listening to Melanies voice, thetighter her nerves stretched. She felt that at any moment she would actually hear them break withthe same pinging sound a banjo string makes when it snaps.

Archies whittling annoyed her and she frowned at him. Suddenly it seemed odd that he shouldbe sitting there occupying himself with a piece of wood. Usually he lay flat on the sofa, during theevenings when he was on guard, and slept and snored so violently that his long beard leaped intothe air with each rumbling breath. It was odder still that neither Melanie nor India hinted to himthat he should spread a paper on the floor to catch his litter of shavings. He had already made aperfect mess on the hearth rug but they did not seem to have noticed it.

While she watched him, Archie turned suddenly toward the fire and spat a stream of tobaccojuice on it with such vehemence that India, Melanie and Pitty leaped as though a bomb hadexploded.

Need you expectorate so loudly? cried India in a voice that cracked with nervous annoyance.

Scarlett looked at her in surprise for India was always so self-contained.

Archie gave her look for look.

I reckon I do, he answered coldly and spat again. Melanie gave a little frowning glance atIndia.

I was always so glad dear Papa didnt chew, began Pitty, and Melanie, her frown creasingdeeper, swung on her and spoke sharper words than Scarlett had ever heard her speak.

Oh, do hush, Auntie! Youre so tactless.

Oh, dear! Pitty dropped her sewing in her lap and her mouth pressed up in hurt. I declare, Idont know What ails you all tonight You and India are just as jumpy and cross as two old sticks.

No one answered her. Melanie did not even apologize for her crossness but went back to hersewing with small violence.

Youre taking stitches an inch long, declared Pitty with some satisfaction. Youll have to takeevery one of them out. Whats the matter with you?

But Melanie still did not answer.

Was there anything the matter with them, Scarlett wondered? Had she been too absorbed withher own fears to notice? Yes, despite Melanies attempts to make the evening appear like any oneof fifty they had all spent together, there was a difference due to their alarm and shock at what hadhappened that afternoon. Scarlett stole glances at her companions and intercepted a look from India.

It discomforted her because it was a long, measuring glance that carried in its cold depthssomething stronger than hate, something more insulting than contempt.

As though she thought I was to blame for what happened, Scarlett thought indignantly.

India turned from her to Archie and, all annoyance at him gone from her face, gave him a lookof veiled anxious inquiry. But he did not meet her eyes. He did however look at Scarlett, staring ather in the same cold hard way India had done.

Silence fell dully in the room as Melanie did not take up the conversation again and, in thesilence, Scarlett heard the rising wind outside. It suddenly began to be a most unpleasant evening.

Now she began to feel the tension in the air and she wondered if it had been present all during theeveningand she too upset to notice it. About Archies face there was an alert waiting look and histufted, hairy old ears seemed pricked up like a lynxs. There was a severely repressed uneasinessabout Melanie and India that made them raise their heads from their sewing at each sound ofhooves in the road, at each groan of bare branches under the wailing wind, at each scuffing soundof dry leaves tumbling across the lawn. They started at each soft snap of burning logs on the hearthas if they were stealthy footsteps.

Something was wrong and Scarlett wondered what it was. Something was afoot and she did notknow about it. A glance at Aunt Pittys plump guileless face, screwed up in a pout, told her that theold lady was as ignorant as she. But Archie and Melanie and India knew. In the silence she couldalmost feel the thoughts of India and Melanie whirling as madly as squirrels in a cage. They knewsomething, were waiting for something, despite their efforts to make things appear as usual. And their inner unease communicated itself to Scarlett, making her more nervous than before. Handlingher needle awkwardly, she jabbed it into her thumb and with a little scream of pain and annoyancethat made them all jump, she squeezed it until a bright red drop appeared.

Im just too nervous to sew, she declared, throwing her mending to the floor. Im nervousenough to scream. I want to go home and go to bed. And Frank knew it and he oughtnt to havegone out. He talks, talks, talks about protecting women against darkies and Carpetbaggers andwhen the time comes for him to do some protecting, where is he? At home, taking care of me? No,indeed, hes gallivanting around with a lot of other men who dont do anything but talk and

Her snapping eyes came to rest on Indias face and she paused. India was breathing fast and herpale lashless eyes were fastened on Scarletts face with a deadly coldness.

If it wont pain you too much, India, she broke off sarcastically, Id be much obliged if youdtell me why youve been staring at me all evening. Has my face turned green or something?

It wont pain me to tell you. Ill do it with pleasure, said India and her eyes glittered. I hate tosee you underrate a fine man like Mr. Kennedy when, if you knew

India! said Melanie warningly, her hands clenching on her sewing.

I think I know my husband better than you do, said Scarlett, the prospect of a quarrel, the firstopen quarrel she had ever had with India, making her spirits rise and her nervousness depart.

Melanies eyes caught Indias and reluctantly India closed her lips. But almost instantly she spokeagain and her voice was cold with hate.

You make me sick, Scarlett OHara, talking about being protected! You dont care about beingprotected! If you did youd never have exposed yourself as you have done all these months,prissing yourself about this town, showing yourself off to strange men, hoping theyll admire you!

What happened to you this afternoon was just what you deserved and if there was any justiceyoud have gotten worse.

Oh, India, hush! cried Melanie.

Let her talk, cried Scarlett Im enjoying it. I always knew she hated me and she was toomuch of a hypocrite to admit it. If she thought anyone would admire her, shed be walking thestreets naked from dawn till dark.

India was on her feet her lean body quivering with insult.

I do hate you, she said in a clear but trembling voice. But it hasnt been hypocrisy thats keptquiet Its something you cant understand, not possessing anyany common courtesy,com(me) mon good breeding. Its the realization that if all of us dont hang together and submerge ourown small hates, we cant expect to beat the Yankees. But youyouyouve done all you couldto lower the prestige of decent peopleworking and bringing shame on a good husband, givingYankees and riffraff the right to laugh at us and make insulting remarks about our lack of gentility.

Yankees dont know that you arent one of us and have never been. Yankees havent sense enoughto know that you havent any gentility. And when youve ridden about the woods exposingyourself to attack, youve exposed every well-behaved woman in town to attack by puttingtemptation in the ways of darkies and mean white trash. And youve put our men folks lives in danger because theyve got to

My God, India! cried Melanie and even in her wrath, Scarlett was stunned to hear Melanietake the Lords name in vain. You must hush! She doesnt know and sheyou must hush! Youpromised

Oh, girls! pleaded Miss Pittypat, her lips trembling.

What dont I know? Scarlett was on her feet, furious, facing the coldly blazing India and theimploring Melanie.

Guinea hens, said Archie suddenly and his voice was contemptuous. Before anyone couldrebuke him, his grizzled head went up sharply and he rose swiftly. Somebody comin up the walk.

Taint Mr. Wilkes neither. Cease your cackle.

There was male authority in his voice and the women stood suddenly silent anger fading swiftlyfrom their faces as he stumped across the room to the door.

Whos thar? he questioned before the caller even knocked.

Captain Butler. Let me in.

Melanie was across the floor so swiftly that her hoops swayed up violently, revealing herpantalets to the knees, and before Archie could put his hand on the knob she flung the door open.

Rhett Butler stood in the doorway, his black slouch hat low over his eyes, the wild wind whippinghis cape about him in snapping folds. For once his good manners had deserted him. He neithertook off his hat nor spoke to the others in the room. He had eyes for no one but Melanie and hespoke abruptly without greeting.

Where have they gone? Tell me quickly. Its life or death.

Scarlett and Pitty, startled and bewildered, looked at each other in wonderment and, like a leanold cat, India streaked across the room to Melanies side.

Dont tell him anything, she cried swiftly. Hes a spy, a Scalawag!

Rhett did not even favor her with a glance.

Quickly, Mrs. Wilkes! There may still be time.

Melanie seemed in a paralysis of terror and only stared into his face.

What on earth began Scarlett.

Shet yore mouth, directed Archie briefly. You too, Miss Melly. Git the hell out of here, youdamned Scalawag.

No, Archie, no! cried Melanie and she put a shaking hand on Rhetts arm as though to protecthim from Archie. What has happened? How didhow did you know?

On Rhetts dark face impatience fought with courtesy.

Good God, Mrs. Wilkes, theyve all been under suspicion since the beginningonly theyvebeen too cleveruntil tonight! How do I know? I was playing poker tonight with two drunkenYankee captains and they let it out. The Yankees knew thered be trouble tonight and theyve prepared for it. The fools have walked into a trap.

For a moment it was as though Melanie swayed under the impact of a heavy blow and Rhettsarm went around her waist to steady her.

Dont tell him! Hes trying to trap you! cried India, glaring at Rhett. Didnt you hear him sayhed been with Yankee officers tonight?

Still Rhett did not look at her. His eyes were bent insistently on Melanies white face.

Tell me. Where did they go? Have they a meeting place?

Despite her fear and incomprehension, Scarlett thought she had never seen a blanker, moreexpressionless face than Rhetts but evidently Melanie saw something else, something that madeher give her trust. She straightened her small body away from the steadying arm and said quietlybut with a voice that shook:

Out the Decatur road near Shantytown. They meet in the cellar of the old Sullivan plantationthe one thats half-burned.

Thank you. Ill ride fast. When the Yankees come here, none of you know anything.

He was gone so swiftly, his black cape melting into the night, that they could hardly realize hehad been there at all until they heard the spattering of gravel and the mad pounding of a horsegoing off at full gallop.

The Yankees coming here? cried Pitty and, her small feet turning under her, she collapsed onthe sofa, too frightened for tears.

Whats it all about? What did he mean? If you dont tell me Ill go crazy! Scarlett laid handson Melanie and shook her violently as if by force she could shake an answer from her.

Mean? It means youve probably been the cause of Ashleys and Mr. Kennedys death! Inspite of the agony of fear there was a note of triumph in Indias voice. Stop shaking Melly. Shesgoing to faint.

No, Im not, whispered Melanie, clutching the back of a chair.

My God, my God! I dont understand! Kill Ashley? Please, somebody tell me

Archies voice, like a rusty hinge, cut through Scarletts words.

Set down, he ordered briefly. Pick up yore sewin. Sew like nothin had happened. For all weknow, the Yankees might have been spyin on this house since sundown. Set down, I say, and sew.

Trembling they obeyed, even Pitty picking up a sock and holding it in shaking fingers while hereyes, wide as a frightened childs went around the circle for an explanation.

Where is Ashley? What has happened to him, Melly? cried Scarlett.

Wheres your husband? Arent you interested in him? Indias pale eyes blazed with insanemalice as she crumpled and straightened the torn towel she had been mending.

India, please! Melanie had mastered her voice but her white, shaken face and tortured eyesshowed the strain under which she was laboring. Scarlett, perhaps we should have told you but butyou had been through so much this afternoon that wethat Frank didnt thinkand youwere always so outspoken against the Klan

The Klan

At first, Scarlett spoke the word as if she had never heard it before and had no comprehension ofits meaning and then:

The Klan! she almost screamed it. Ashley isnt in the Klan! Frank cant be! Oh, he promisedme!

Of course, Mr. Kennedy is in the Klan and Ashley, too, and all the men we know, cried India.

They are men, arent they? And white men and Southerners. You should have been proud of himinstead of making him sneak out as though it were something shameful and

You all have known all along and I didnt

We were afraid it would upset you, said Melanie sorrowfully.

Then thats where they go when theyre supposed to be at the political meetings? Oh, hepromised me! Now, the Yankees will come and take my mills and the store and put him in jailoh,what did Rhett Butler mean?

Indias eyes met Melanies in wild fear. Scarlett rose, flinging her sewing down.

If you dont tell me, Im going downtown and find out. Ill ask everybody I see until I find

Set, said Archie, fixing her with his eye. Ill tell you. Because you went gallivantin thisafternoon and got yore-self into trouble through yore own fault, Mr. Wilkes and Mr. Kennedy andthe other men are out tonight to kill that thar nigger and that thar white man, if they can catchthem, and wipe out that whole Shantytown settlement. And if what that Scalawag said is true, theYankees suspected sumpin or got wind somehow and theyve sont out troops to lay for them. Andour men have walked into a trap. And if what Butler said warnt true, then hes a spy and he isgoin to turn them up to the Yankees and theyll git kilt just the same. And if he does turn them up,then Ill kill him, if its the last deed of m life. And if they aint kilt, then theyll all have to lightout of here for Texas and lay low and maybe never come back. Its all yore fault and thars bloodon yore hands.

Anger wiped out the fear from Melanies face as she saw comprehension come slowly acrossScarletts face and then horror follow swiftly. She rose and put her hand on Scarletts shoulder.

Another such word and you go out of this house, Archie, she said sternly. Its not her faultShe only diddid what she felt she had to do. And our men did what they felt they had to do.

People must do what they must do. We dont all think alike or act alike and its wrong toto judgeothers by ourselves. How can you and India say such cruel things when her husband as well asmine may bemay be

Hark! interrupted Archie softly. Set, Mam. Thars horses.

Melanie sank into a chair, picked up one of Ashleys shirts and, bowing her head over it,unconsciously began to tear the frills into small ribbons.

The sound of hooves grew louder as horses trotted up to the house. There was the jangling of bits and the strain of leather and the sound of voices. As the hooves stopped in front of the house,one voice rose above the others in a command and the listeners heard feet going through the sideyard toward the back porch. They felt that a thousand inimical eyes looked at them through theunshaded front window and the four women, with fear in their hearts, bent their heads and pliedtheir needles. Scarletts heart screamed in her breast: Ive killed Ashley! Ive killed him! And inthat wild moment she did not even think that she might have killed Frank too. She had no room inher mind for any picture save that of Ashley, lying at the feet of Yankee cavalrymen, his fair hairdappled with blood.

As the harsh rapid knocking sounded at the door, she looked at Melanie and saw come over thesmall, strained face a new expression, an expression as blank as she had just seen on Rhett Butlersface, the bland blank look of a poker player bluffing a game with only two deuces.

Archie, open the door, she said quietly.

Slipping his knife into his boot top and loosening the pistol in his trouser band, Archie stumpedover to the door and flung it open. Pitty gave a little squeak, like a mouse who feels the trap snapdown, as she saw massed in the doorway, a Yankee captain and a squad of bluecoats. But theothers said nothing. Scarlett saw with the faintest feeling of relief that she knew this officer. Hewas Captain Tom Jaffery, one of Rhetts friends. She had sold him lumber to build his house. Sheknew him to be a gentleman. Perhaps, as he was a gentleman, he wouldnt drag them away toprison. He recognized her instantly and, taking off his hat, bowed, somewhat embarrassed.

Good evening, Mrs. Kennedy. And which of you ladies is Mrs. Wilkes?

I am Mrs. Wilkes, answered Melanie, rising and for all her smallness, dignity flowed from her.

And to what do I owe this intrusion?

The eyes of the captain flickered quickly about the room, resting for an instant on each face,passing quickly from their faces to the table and the hat rack as though looking for signs of maleoccupancy.

I should like to speak to Mr. Wilkes and Mr. Kennedy, if you please.

They are not here, said Melanie, a chill in her soft voice.

Are you sure?

Dont you question Miz Wilkes word, said Archie, his beard bristling.

I beg your pardon, Mrs. Wilkes. I meant no disrespect. If you give me your word, I will notsearch the house.

You have my word. But search if you like. They are at a meeting downtown at Mr. Kennedysstore.

They are not at the store. There was no meeting tonight, answered the captain grimly. Wewill wait outside until they return.

He bowed briefly and went out, closing the door behind him. Those in the house heard a sharporder, muffled by the wind: Surround the house. A man at each window and door. There was atramping of feet. Scarlett checked a start of terror as she dimly saw bearded faces peering in the windows at them. Melanie sat down and with a hand that did not tremble reached for a book on thetable. It was a ragged copy of Les Miserables, that book which caught the fancy of the Confederatesoldiers. They had read it by campfire light and took some grim pleasure in calling it LeesMiserables. She opened it at the middle and began to read in a clear monotonous voice.

Sew, commanded Archie in a hoarse whisper and the three women, nerved by Melanies coolvoice, picked up their sewing and bowed their heads.

How long Melanie read beneath that circle of watching eyes, Scarlett never knew but it seemedhours. She did not even hear a word that Melanie read. Now she was beginning to think of Frankas well as Ashley. So this was the explanation of his apparent calm this evening! He had promisedher he would have nothing to do with the Klan. Oh, this was just the kind of trouble she had fearedwould come upon them! All the work of this last year would go for nothing. All her struggles andfears and labors in rain and cold had been wasted. And who would have thought that spiritless oldFrank would get himself mixed up in the hot-headed doings of the Klan? Even at this minute, hemight be dead. And if he wasnt dead and the Yankees caught him, hed be hanged. And Ashley,too!

Her nails dug, into her palms until four bright-red crescents showed. How could Melanie read onand on so calmly when Ashley was in danger of being hanged? When he might be dead? Butsomething in the cool soft voice reading the sorrows of Jean Valjean steadied her, kept her fromleaping to her feet and screaming.

Her mind fled back to the night Tony Fontaine had come to them, hunted, exhausted, withoutmoney. If he had not reached their house and received money and a fresh horse, he would havebeen hanged long since. If Frank and Ashley were not dead at this very minute, they were inTonys position, only worse. With the house surrounded by soldiers they couldnt come home andget money and clothes without being captured. And probably every house up and down the streethad a similar guard of Yankees, so they could not apply to friends for aid. Even now they might beriding wildly through the night, bound for Texas.

But Rhettperhaps Rhett had reached them in time. Rhett always had plenty of cash in hispocket. Perhaps he would lend them enough to see them through. But that was queer. Why shouldRhett bother himself about Ashleys safety? Certainly he disliked him, certainly he professed acontempt for him. Then why But his riddle was swallowed up in a renewed fear for the safety ofAshley and Frank.

Oh, its all my fault! she wailed to herself. India and Archie spoke the truth. Its all my fault.

But I never thought either of them was foolish enough to join the Klan! And I never thoughtanything would really happen to me! But I couldnt have done otherwise. Melly spoke the truth.

People have to do what they have to do. And I had to keep the mills going! I had to have money!

And now Ill probably lose it all and somehow its all my fault!

After a long time Melanies voice faltered, trailed off and was silent. She turned her head towardthe window and stared as though no Yankee soldier stared back from behind the glass. The othersraised their heads, caught by her listening pose, and they too listened.

There was a sound of horses feet and of singing, deadened by the closed windows and doors, borne away by the wind but still recognizable. It was the most hated and hateful of all songs, thesong about Shermans men Marching through Georgia and Rhett Butler was singing it.

Hardly had he finished the first lines when two other voices, drunken voices, assailed him,enraged foolish voices that stumbled over words and blurred them together. There was a quickcommand from Captain Jaffery on the front porch and the rapid tramp of feet. But even beforethese sounds arose, the ladies looked at one another stunned. For the drunken voices expostulatingwith Rhett were those of Ashley and Hugh Elsing.

Voices rose louder on the front walk, Captain Jafferys curt and questioning, Hughs shrill withfoolish laughter, Rhetts deep and reckless and Ashleys queer, unreal, shouting: What the hell!

What the hell!

That cant be Ashley! thought Scarlett wildly. He never gets drunk! And Rhettwhy, whenRhetts drunk he gets quieter and quieternever loud like that!

Melanie rose and, with her, Archie rose. They heard the captains sharp voice: These two menare under arrest. And Archies hand closed over his pistol butt.

No, whispered Melanie firmly. No. Leave it to me.

There was in her face the same look Scarlett had seen that day at Tara when Melanie had stoodat the top of the steps looking down at the dead Yankee, her weak wrist weighed down by theheavy sabera gentle and timid soul nerved by circumstances to the caution and fury of a tigress.

She threw the front door open.

Bring him in, Captain Butler, she called in a clear tone that bit with venom. I suppose youvegotten him intoxicated again. Bring him in.

From the dark windy walk, the Yankee captain spoke: Im sorry, Mrs. Wilkes, but your husbandand Mr. Elsing are under arrest.

Arrest? For what? For drunkenness? If everyone in Atlanta was arrested for drunkenness, thewhole Yankee garrison would be in jail continually. Well, bring him in, Captain Butlerthat is, ifyou can walk yourself.

Scarletts mind was not working quickly and for a brief moment nothing made sense. She knewneither Rhett nor Ashley was drunk and she knew Melanie knew they were not drunk. Yet here wasMelanie, usually so gentle and refined, screaming like a shrew and in front of Yankees too, thatboth of them were too drunk to walk.

There was a short mumbled argument, punctuated with curses, and uncertain feet ascended thestairs. In the doorway appeared Ashley, white faced, his head lolling, his bright hair tousled, hislong body wrapped from neck to knees in Rhetts black cape. Hugh Elsing and Rhett, none toosteady on their feet, supported him on either side and it was obvious he would have fallen to thefloor but for their aid. Behind them came the Yankee captain, his face a study of mingled suspicionand amusement. He stood in the open doorway with his men peering curiously over his shouldersand the cold wind swept the house.

Scarlett, frightened, puzzled, glanced at Melanie and back to the sagging Ashley and then half-comprehension came to her. She started to cry out: But he cant be drunk! and bit back the words. She realized she was witnessing a play, a desperate play on which lives hinged. She knewshe was not part of it nor was Aunt Pitty but the others were and they were tossing cues to oneanother like actors in an oft-rehearsed drama. She understood only half but she understood enoughto keep silent.

Put him in the chair, cried Melanie indignantly. And you, Captain Butler, leave this houseimmediately! How dare you show your face here after getting him in this condition again!

The two men eased Ashley into a rocker and Rhett, swaying, caught hold of the back of the chairto steady himself and addressed the captain with pain in his voice.

Thats fine thanks I get, isnt it? For keeping the police from getting him and bringing himhome and him yelling and trying to claw me!

And you, Hugh Elsing, Im ashamed of you! What will your poor mother say? Drunk and outwith aa Yankee-loving Scalawag like Captain Butler! And, oh, Mr. Wilkes, how could you dosuch a thing?

Melly, I aint so very drunk, mumbled Ashley, and with the words fell forward and lay facedown on the table, his head buried in his arms.

Archie, take him to his room and put him to bedas usual, ordered Melanie. Aunt Pitty,please run and fix the bed and oo-oh, she suddenly burst into tears. Oh, how could he? After hepromised!

Archie already had his arm under Ashleys shoulder and Pitty, frightened and uncertain, was onher feet when the captain interposed.

Dont touch him. Hes under arrest. Sergeant!

As the sergeant stepped into the room, his rifle at trail, Rhett, evidently trying to steady himself,put a hand on the captains arm and, with difficulty, focused his eyes.

Tom, what you arresting him for? He aint so very drunk. Ive seen him drunker.

Drunk be damned, cried the captain. He can lie in the gutter for all I care. Im no policeman.

He and Mr. Elsing are under arrest for complicity in a Klan raid at Shantytown tonight. A niggerand a white man were killed. Mr. Wilkes was the ringleader in it.

Tonight? Rhett began to laugh. He laughed so hard that he sat down on the sofa and put hishead in his hands. Not tonight, Tom, he said when he could speak. These two have been withme tonightever since eight oclock when they were supposed to be at the meeting.

With you, Rhett? But A frown came over the captains forehead and he looked uncertainlyat the snoring Ashley and his weeping wife. Butwhere were you?

I dont like to say, and Rhett shot a look of drunken cunning at Melanie.

Youd better say!

Les go out on the porch and Ill tell you where we were.

Youll tell me now.

Hate to say it in front of ladies. If you ladiesll step out of the room

I wont go, cried Melanie, dabbing angrily at her eyes with her handkerchief. I have a right toknow. Where was my husband?

At Belle Watlings sporting house, said Rhett, looking abashed. He was there and Hugh andFrank Kennedy and Dr. Meade andand a whole lot of them. Had a party. Big party. Champagne.

Girls

Atat Belle Watlings?

Melanies voice rose until it cracked with such pain that all eyes turned frightenedly to her. Herhand went clutching at her bosom and, before Archie could catch her, she had fainted. Then ahubbub ensued, Archie picking her up, India running to the kitchen for water, Pitty and Scarlettfanning her and slapping her wrists, while Hugh Elsing shouted over and over: Now youve doneit! Now youve done it!

Now itll be all over town, said Rhett savagely. I hope youre satisfied, Tom. There wont bea wife in Atlanta wholl speak to her husband tomorrow.

Rhett, I had no idea Though the chill wind was blowing through the open door on his back,the captain was perspiring. Look here! You take an oath they were aterat Belles?

Hell, yes, growled Rhett Go ask Belle herself if you dont believe me. Now, let me carryMrs. Wilkes to her room. Give her to me, Archie. Yes, I can carry her. Miss Pitty, go ahead with alamp.

He took Melanies limp body from Archies arms with ease.

You get Mr. Wilkes to bed, Archie. I dont want to ever lay eyes or hands on him again afterthis night.

Pittys hand trembled so that the lamp was a menace to the safety of the house but she held itand trotted ahead toward the dark bedroom. Archie, with a grunt, got an arm under Ashley andraised him.

ButIve got to arrest these men!

Rhett turned in the dim hallway.

Arrest them in the morning then. They cant run away in this conditionand I never knewbefore that it was illegal to get drunk in a sporting house. Good God, Tom, there are fifty witnessesto prove they were at Belles.

There are always fifty witnesses to prove a Southerner was somewhere he wasnt, said thecaptain morosely. You come with me, Mr. Elsing. Ill parole Mr. Wilkes on the word of

I am Mr. Wilkes sister. I will answer for his appearance, said India coldly. Now, will youplease go? Youve caused enough trouble for one night.

I regret it exceedingly. The captain bowed awkwardly. I only hope they can prove theirpresence at theerMissMrs. Watlings house. Will you tell your brother that he must appearbefore the provost marshal tomorrow morning for questioning?

India bowed coldly and, putting her hand upon the door knob, intimated silently that his speedy retirement would be welcome. The captain and the sergeant backed out, Hugh Elsing with them,and she slammed the door behind them. Without even looking at Scarlett, she went swiftly to eachwindow and drew down the shade. Scarlett, her knees shaking, caught hold of the chair in whichAshley had been sitting to steady herself. Looking down at it, she saw that there was a dark moistspot, larger than her hand, on the cushion in the back of the chair. Puzzled, her hand went over itand, to her horror, a sticky red wetness appeared on her palm.

India, she whispered, India, Ashleyshes hurt.

You fool! Did you think he was really drunk? India snapped down the last shade and startedon flying feet for the bedroom, with Scarlett close behind her, her heart in her throat. Rhetts bigbody barred the doorway but, past his shoulder, Scarlett saw Ashley lying white and still on thebed. Melanie, strangely quick for one so recently in a faint, was rapidly cutting off his blood-soaked shirt with embroidery scissors. Archie held the lamp low over the bed to give light and oneof his gnarled fingers was on Ashleys wrist.

Is he dead? cried both girls together.

No, just fainted from loss of blood. Its through his shoulder, said Rhett.

Why did you bring him here, you fool? cried India, Let me get to him! Let me pass! Why didyou bring him here to be arrested?

He was too weak to travel. There was nowhere else to bring him, Miss Wilkes. Besidesdoyou want him to be an exile like Tony Fontaine? Do you want a dozen of your neighbors to live inTexas under assumed names for the rest of their lives? Theres a chance that we may get them alloff if Belle

Let me pass!

No, Miss Wilkes. Theres work for you. You must go for a doctor Not Dr. Meade. Hesimplicated in this and is probably explaining to the Yankees at this very minute. Get some otherdoctor. Are you afraid to go out alone at night?

No, said India, her pale eyes glittering. Im not afraid. She caught up Melanies hooded capewhich was hanging on a book in the hall. Ill go for old Dr. Dean. The excitement went out ofher voice as, with an effort, she forced calmness. Im sorry I called you a spy and a fool. I did notunderstand. Im deeply grateful for what youve done for Ashleybut I despise you just thesame.

I appreciate franknessand I thank you for it. Rhett bowed and his lip curled down in anamused smile. Now, go quickly and by back ways and when you return do not come in this houseif you see signs of soldiers about.

India shot one more quick anguished look at Ashley, and, wrapping her cape about her, ranlightly down the hall to the back door and let herself out quietly into the night.

Scarlett, straining her eyes past Rhett, felt her heart beat again as she saw Ashleys eyes open.

Melanie snatched a folded towel from the washstand rack and pressed it against his streamingshoulder and he smiled up weakly, reassuringly into her face. Scarlett felt Rhetts hard penetratingeyes upon her, knew that her heart was plain upon her face, but she did not care. Ashley was bleeding, perhaps dying and she who loved him had torn that hole through his shoulder. Shewanted to run to the bed, sink down beside it and clasp him to her but her knees trembled so thatshe could not enter the room. Hand at her mouth, she stared while Melanie packed a fresh towelagainst his shoulder, pressing it hard as though she could force back the blood into his body. Butthe towel reddened as though by magic.

How could a man bleed so much and still live? But, thank God, there was no bubble of blood athis lipsoh, those frothy red bubbles, forerunners of death that she knew so well from thedreadful day of the battle at Peachtree Creek when the wounded had died on Aunt Pittys lawn withbloody mouths.

Brace up, said Rhett, and there was a hard, faintly jeering note in his voice. He wont die.

Now, go take the lamp and hold it for Mrs. Wilkes. I need Archie to run errands.

Archie looked across the lamp at Rhett.

I aint takin no orders from you, he said briefly, shifting his wad of tobacco to the othercheek.

You do what he says, said Melanie sternly, and do it quickly. Do everything Captain Butlersays. Scarlett, take the lamp.

Scarlett went forward and took the lamp, holding it in both hands to keep from dropping it.

Ashleys eyes had closed again. His bare chest heaved up slowly and sank quickly and the redstream seeped from between Melanies small frantic fingers. Dimly she heard Archie stump acrossthe room to Rhett and heard Rhetts low rapid words. Her mind was so fixed upon Ashley that ofthe first half-whispered words of Rhett, she only heard: Take my horse ... tied outside ... ride likehell.

Archie mumbled some question and Scarlett heard Rhett reply: The old Sullivan plantation.

Youll find the robes pushed up the biggest chimney. Burn them.

Um, grunted Archie.

And theres twomen in the cellar. Pack them over the horse as best you can and take them tothat vacant lot behind Bellesthe one between her house and the railroad tracks. Be careful. Ifanyone sees you, youll hang as well as the rest of us. Put them in that lot and put pistols near themin their hands. Heretake mine.

Scarlett, looking across the room, saw Rhett reach under his coat tails and produce two revolverswhich Archie took and shoved into his waist band.

Fire one shot from each. Its got to appear like a plain case of shooting. You understand?

Archie nodded as if he understood perfectly and an unwilling gleam of respect shone in his coldeye. But understanding was far from Scarlett. The last half-hour had been so nightmarish that shefelt nothing would ever be plain and clear again. However, Rhett seemed in perfect command ofthe bewildering situation and that was a small comfort.

Archie turned to go and then swung about and his one eye went questioningly to Rhetts face.

Him?

Yes.

Archie grunted and spat on the floor.

Hell to pay, he said as he stumped down the hall to the back door.

Something in the last low interchange of words made a new fear and suspicion rise up inScarletts breast like a chill ever-swelling bubble. When that bubble brokeWheres Frank? she cried.

Rhett came swiftly across the room to the bed, his big body swinging as lightly and noiselesslyas a cats.

All in good time, he said and smiled briefly. Steady that lamp, Scarlett. You dont want toburn Mr. Wilkes up. Miss Melly

Melanie looked up like a good little soldier awaiting a command and so tense was the situation itdid not occur to her that for the first time Rhett was calling her familiarly by the name which onlyfamily and old friends used.

I beg your pardon, I mean, Mrs. Wilkes. ...

Oh, Captain Butler, do not ask my pardon! I should feel honored if you called me Melly

without the Miss! I feel as though you were mymy brother oror my cousin. How kind you areand how clever! How can I ever thank you enough?

Thank you, said Rhett and for a moment he looked almost embarrassed. I should neverpresume so far, but Miss Melly, and his voice was apologetic, Im sorry I had to say that Mr.

Wilkes was in Belle Watlings house. Im sorry to have involved him and the others in such aBut I had to think fast when I rode away from here and that was the only plan that occurred to me.

I knew my word would be accepted because I have so many friends among the Yankee officers.

They do me the dubious honor of thinking me almost one of them because they know myshallwe call it my unpopularity?among my townsmen. And you see, I was playing poker in Bellesbar earlier in the evening. There are a dozen Yankee soldiers who can testify to that. And Belle andher girls will gladly lie themselves black in the face and say Mr. Wilkes and the others wereupstairs all evening. And the Yankees will believe them. Yankees are queer that way. It wont occurto them that women oftheir profession are capable of intense loyalty or patriotism. The Yankeeswouldnt take the word of a single nice Atlanta lady as to the whereabouts of the men who weresupposed to be at the meeting tonight but they will take the word offancy ladies. And I think thatbetween the word of honor of a Scalawag and a dozen fancy ladies, we may have a chance ofgetting the men off.

There was a sardonic grin on his face at the last words but it faded as Melanie turned up to him aface that blazed with gratitude.

Captain Butler, you are so smart! I wouldnt have cared if youd said they were in hell itselftonight, if it saves them! For I know and every one else who matters knows that my husband wasnever in a dreadful place like that!

Well began Rhett awkwardly, as a matter of fact, he was at Belles tonight.

Melanie drew herself up coldly.

You can never make me believe such a lie!

Please, Miss Melly! Let me explain! When I got out to the old Sullivan place tonight, I foundMr. Wilkes wounded and with him were Hugh Elsing and Dr. Meade and old man Merriwether

Not the old gentleman! cried Scarlett.

Men are never too old to be fools. And your Uncle Henry

Oh, mercy! cried Aunt Pitty.

The others had scattered after the brush with the troops and the crowd that stuck together hadcome to the Sullivan place to hide their robes in the chimney and to see how badly Mr. Wilkes washurt. But for his wound, theyd be headed for Texas by nowall of thembut he couldnt ride farand they wouldnt leave him. It was necessary to prove that they had been somewhere instead ofwhere they had been, and so I took them by back ways to Belle Watlings.

OhI see. I do beg your pardon for my rudeness, Captain Butler. I see now it was necessary totake them there but Oh, Captain Butler, people must have seen you going in!

No one saw us. We went in through a private back entrance that opens on the railroad tracks.

Its always dark and locked.

Then how?

I have a key, said Rhett laconically, and his eyes met Melanies evenly.

As the full impact of the meaning smote her, Melanie became so embarrassed that she fumbledwith the bandage until it slid off the wound entirely.

I did not mean to pry she said in a muffled voice, her white face reddening, as she hastilypressed the towel back into place.

I regret having to tell a lady such a thing.

Then its true! thought Scarlett with an odd pang. Then he does live with that dreadful Watlingcreature! He does own her house!

I saw Belle and explained to her. We gave her a list of the men who were out tonight and sheand her girls will testify that they were all in her house tonight. Then to make our exit moreconspicuous, she called the two desperadoes who keep order at her place and had us draggeddownstairs, fighting, and through the barroom and thrown out into the street as brawling drunkswho were disturbing the place.

He grinned reminiscently. Dr. Meade did not make a very convincing drunk. It hurt his dignityto even be in such a place. But your Uncle Henry and old man Merriwether were excellent. Thestage lost two great actors when they did not take up the drama. They seemed to enjoy the affair.

Im afraid your Uncle Henry has a black eye due to Mr. Merriwethers zeal for his part. He

The back door swung open and India entered, followed by old Dr. Dean, his long white hairtumbled, his worn leather bag bulging under his cape. He nodded briefly but without words tothose present and quickly lifted the bandage from Ashleys shoulder.

Too high for the lung, he said. If it hasnt splintered his collar bone its not so serious. Get meplenty of towels, ladies, and cotton if you have it, and some brandy.

Rhett took the lamp from Scarlett and set it on the table as Melanie and India sped about,obeying the doctors orders.

You cant do anything here. Come into the parlor by the fire. He took her arm and propelledher from the room. There was a gentleness foreign to him in both hand and voice. Youve had arotten day, havent you?

She allowed herself to be led into the front room and though she stood on the hearth rug in frontof the fire she began to shiver. The bubble of suspicion in her breast was swelling larger now. Itwas more than a suspicion. It was almost a certainty and a terrible certainty. She looked up intoRhetts immobile face and for a moment she could not speak. Then:

Was Frank atBelle Watlings?

No.

Rhetts voice was blunt.

Archies carrying him to the vacant lot near Belles. Hes dead. Shot through the head.

Chapter 46

FEW FAMILIES in the north end of town slept that night for the news of the disaster to the Klan,and Rhetts stratagem spread swiftly on silent feet as the shadowy form of India Wilkes slippedthrough back yards, whispered urgently through kitchen doors and slipped away into the windydarkness. And in her path, she left fear and desperate hope.

From without, houses looked black and silent and wrapped in sleep but, within, voiceswhispered vehemently into the dawn. Not only those involved in the nights raid but every memberof the Klan was ready for flight and in almost every stable along Peachtree Street, horses stoodsaddled in the darkness, pistols in holsters and food in saddlebags. All that prevented a wholesaleexodus was Indias whispered message: Captain Butler says not to run. The roads will bewatched. He has arranged with that Watling creature In dark rooms men whispered: But whyshould I trust that damned Scalawag Butler? It may be a trap! And womens voices implored:

Dont go! If he saved Ashley and Hugh, he may save everybody. If India and Melanie trust him And they half trusted and stayed because there was no other course open to them.

Earlier in the night, the soldiers had knocked at a dozen doors and those who could not or wouldnot tell where they had been that night were marched off under arrest. Ren Picard and one of Mrs.

Merriwethers nephews and the Simmons boys and Andy Bonnell were among those who spent thenight in jail. They had been in the ill-starred foray but had separated from the others after theshooting. Riding hard for home they were arrested before they learned of Rhetts plan. Fortunatelythey all replied, to questions, that where they had been that night was their own business and notthat of any damned Yankees. They had been locked up for further questioning in the morning. Oldman Merriwether and Uncle Henry Hamilton declared shamelessly that they had spent the eveningat Belle Watlings sporting house and when Captain Jaffery remarked irritably that they were too old for such goings on, they wanted to fight him.

Belle Watling herself answered Captain Jafferys summons, and before he could make knownhis mission she shouted that the house was closed for the night. A passel of quarrelsome drunkshad called in the early part of the evening and had fought one another, torn the place up, brokenher finest mirrors and so alarmed the young ladies that all business had been suspended for thenight. But if Captain Jaffery wanted a drink, the bar was still openCaptain Jaffery, acutely conscious of the grins of his men and feeling helplessly that he wasfighting a mist, declared angrily that he wanted neither the young ladies nor a drink and demandedif Belle knew the names of her destructive customers. Oh, yes, Belle knew them. They were herregulars. They came every Wednesday night and called themselves the Wednesday Democrats,though what they meant by that she neither knew or cared. And if they didnt pay for the damageto the mirrors in the upper hall, she was going to have the law on them. She kept a respectablehouse and Oh, their names? Belle unhesitatingly reeled off the names of twelve under suspicion,Captain Jaffery smiled sourly.

These damned Rebels are as efficiently organized as our Secret Service, he said. You andyour girls will have to appear before the provost marshal tomorrow.

Will the provost make them pay for my mirrors?

To hell with your mirrors! Make Rhett Butler pay for them. He owns the place, doesnt he?

Before dawn, every ex-Confederate family in town knew everything. And their negroes, whohad been told nothing, knew everything too, by that black grapevine telegraph system which defieswhite understanding. Everyone knew the details of the raid, the killing of Frank Kennedy andcrippled Tommy Wellburn and how Ashley was wounded in carrying Franks body away.

Some of the feeling of bitter hatred the women bore Scarlett for her share in the tragedy wasmitigated by the knowledge that her husband was dead and she knew it and could not admit it andhave the poor comfort of claiming his body. Until morning light disclosed the bodies and theauthorities notified her, she must know nothing. Frank and Tommy, pistols in cold hands, laystiffening among the dead weeds in a vacant lot. And the Yankees would say they killed each otherin a common drunken brawl over a girl in Belles house. Sympathy ran high for Fanny, Tommyswife, who had just had a baby, but no one could slip through the darkness to see her and comforther because a squad of Yankees surrounded the house, waiting for Tommy to return. And there wasanother squad about Aunt Pittys house, waiting for Frank.

Before dawn the news had trickled about that the military inquiry would take place that day. Thetownspeople, heavy eyed from sleeplessness and anxious waiting, knew that the safety of some oftheir most prominent citizens rested on three thingsthe ability of Ashley Wilkes to stand on hisfeet and appear before the military board, as though he suffered nothing more serious than amorning-after headache, the word of Belle Watling that these men had been in her house allevening and the word of Rhett Butler that he had been with them.

The town writhed at these last two! Belle Watling! To owe their mens lives to her! It wasintolerable! Women who had ostentatiously crossed the street when they saw Belle coming,wondered if she remembered and trembled for fear she did. The men felt less humiliation at taking their lives from Belle than the women did, for many of them thought her a good sort. But theywere stung that they must owe lives and freedom to Rhett Butler, a speculator and a Scalawag.

Belle and Rhett, the towns best-known fancy woman and the towns most hated man. And theymust be under obligation to them.

Another thought that stung them to impotent wrath was the knowledge that the Yankees andCarpetbaggers would laugh. Oh, how they would laugh! Twelve of the towns most prominentcitizens revealed as habitual frequenters of Belle Watlings sporting house! Two of them killed in afight over a cheap little girl, others ejected from the place as too drunk to be tolerated even byBelle and some under arrest, refusing to admit they were there when everyone knew they werethere!

Atlanta was right in fearing that the Yankees would laugh. They had squirmed too long beneathSouthern coldness and contempt and now they exploded with hilarity. Officers woke comrades andretailed the news. Husbands roused wives at dawn and told them as much as could be decently toldto women. And the women, dressing hastily, knocked on their neighbors doors and spread thestory. The Yankee ladies were charmed with it all and laughed until tears ran down their faces. Thiswas Southern chivalry and gallantry for you! Maybe those women who carried their heads so highand snubbed all attempts at friendliness wouldnt be so uppity, now that everyone knew wheretheir husbands spent their time when they were supposed to be at political meetings. Politicalmeetings! Well, that was funny!

But even as they laughed, they expressed regret for Scarlett and her tragedy. After all, Scarlettwas a lady and one of the few ladies in Atlanta who were nice to Yankees. She had already wontheir sympathy by the fact that she had to work because her husband couldnt or wouldnt supporther properly. Even though her husband was a sorry one, it was dreadful that the poor thing shoulddiscover he had been untrue to her. And it was doubly dreadful that his death should occursimultaneously with the discovery of his infidelity. After all, a poor husband was better than nohusband at all, and the Yankee ladies decided theyd be extra nice to Scarlett But the others, Mrs.

Meade, Mrs. Merriwether, Mrs. Elsing, Tommy Wellburns widow and most of all, Mrs. AshleyWilkes, theyd laugh in their faces every time they saw them. That would teach them a littlecourtesy.

Much of the whispering that went on in the dark rooms on the north side of town that night wason this same subject. Atlanta ladies vehemently told their husbands that they did not care a rapwhat the Yankees thought. But inwardly they felt that running an Indian gantlet would be infinitelypreferable to suffering the ordeal of Yankee grins and not being able to tell the truth about theirhusbands.

Dr. Meade, beside himself with outraged dignity at the position into which Rhett had jockeyedhim and the others, told Mrs. Meade that, but for the fact that it would implicate the others, hewould rather confess and be hanged than say he had been at Belles house.

It is an insult to you, Mrs. Meade, he fumed.

But everyone will know you werent there forfor

The Yankees wont know. Theyll have to believe it if we save our necks. And theyll laugh.

The very thought that anyone will believe it and laugh infuriates me. And it insults you becausemy dear, I have always been faithful to you.

I know that, and in the darkness Mrs. Meade smiled and slipped a thin hand into the doctors.

But Id rather it were really true than have one hair of your head in danger.

Mrs. Meade, do you know what you are saying? cried the doctor, aghast at the unsuspectedrealism of his wife.

Yes, I know. Ive lost Darcy and Ive lost Phil and you are all I have and, rather than lose you,Id have you take up your permanent abode at that place.

You are distrait! You cannot know what you are saying.

You old fool, said Mrs. Meade tenderly and laid her head against his sleeve.

Dr. Meade fumed into silence and stroked her cheek and then exploded again. And to be underobligation to that Butler man! Hanging would be easy compared to that. No, not even if I owe himmy life, can I be polite to him. His insolence is monumental and his shamelessness about hisprofiteering makes me boil. To owe my life to a man who never went in the army

Melly said he enlisted after Atlanta fell.

Its a lie. Miss Melly will believe any plausible scoundrel. And what I cant understand is whyhe is doing all thisgoing to all this trouble. I hate to say it butwell, theres always been talkabout him and Mrs. Kennedy. Ive seen them coming in from rides together too often this last year.

He must have done it because of her.

If it was because of Scarlett, he wouldnt have lifted his hand. Hed have been glad to seeFrank Kennedy hanged. I think its because of Melly

Mrs. Meade, you cant be insinuating that theres ever been anything between those two!

Oh, dont be silly! But shes always been unaccountably fond of him ever since he tried to getAshley exchanged during the war. And I must say this for him, he never smiles in that nasty-niceway when hes with her. Hes just as pleasant and thoughtful as can bereally a different man.

You can tell by the way he acts with Melly that he could be decent if he wanted to. Now, my ideaof why hes doing all this is She paused. Doctor, you wont like my idea.

I dont like anything about this whole affair!

Well, I think he did it partly for Mellys sake but mostly because he thought it would be a hugejoke on us all. Weve hated him so much and showed it so plainly and now hes got us in a fixwhere all of you have your choice of saying you were at that Watling womans house and shamingyourself and wives before the Yankeesor telling the truth and getting hanged. And he knowswell all be under obligation to him and hismistress and that wed almost rather be hanged thanbe obliged to them. Oh, Ill wager hes enjoying it.

The doctor groaned. He did look amused when he took us upstairs in that place.

Doctor, Mrs. Meade hesitated, what did it look like?

What are you saying, Mrs. Meade?

Her house. What did it look like? Are there cut-glass chandeliers? And red plush curtains anddozens of full-length gilt mirrors? And were the girlswere they unclothed?

Good God! cried the doctor, thunderstruck, for it had never occurred to him that the curiosityof a chaste woman concerning her unchaste sisters was so devouring. How can you ask suchimmodest questions? You are not yourself. I will mix you a sedative.

I dont want a sedative. I want to know. Oh, dear, this is my only chance to know what a badhouse looks like and now you are mean enough not to tell me!

I noticed nothing. I assure you I was too embarrassed at finding myself in such a place to takenote of my surroundings, said the doctor formally, more upset at this unsuspected revelation of hiswifes character than he had been by all the previous events of the evening. If you will excuse menow, I will try to get some sleep.

Well, go to sleep then, she answered, disappointment in her tones. Then as the doctor leanedover to remove his boots, her voice spoke from the darkness with renewed cheerfulness. I imagineDolly has gotten it all out of old man Merriwether and she can tell me about it.

Good Heavens, Mrs. Meade! Do you mean to tell me that nice women talk about such thingsamong them

Oh, go to bed, said Mrs. Meade.

It sleeted the next day, but as the wintry twilight drew on the icy particles stopped falling and acold wind blew. Wrapped in her cloak, Melanie went bewilderedly down her front walk behind astrange negro coachman, who had summoned her mysteriously to a closed carriage waiting in frontof the house. As she came up to the carriage the door was opened and she saw a woman in the dimulterior.

Leaning closer, peering inside, Melanie questioned: Who is it? Wont you come in the house?

Its so cold

Please come in here and set with me a minute, Miz Wilkes, came a faintly familiar voice, anembarrassed voice from the depths of the carriage.

Oh, youre MissMrs.Watling! cried Melanie. I did so want to see you! You must comein the house.

I cant do that, Miz Wilkes. Belle Watlings voice sounded scandalized. You come in hereand set a minute with me.

Melanie entered the carriage and the coachman closed the door behind her. She sat down besideBelle and reached for her hand.

How can I ever thank you enough for what you did today! How can any of us thank youenough!

Miz Wilkes, you hadnt ought of sent me that note this mornin. Not that I wasnt proud to havea note from you but the Yankees might of got it. And as for sayin you was goin to call on me tothank mewhy, Miz Wilkes, you must of lost your mind! The very idea! I come up here as soon as twas dark to tell you you mustnt think of any sech thing. Why, Iwhy, youit wouldnt befittin at all.

It wouldnt be fitting for me to call and thank a kind woman who saved my husbands life?

Oh, shucks, Miz Wilkes! You know what I mean!

Melanie was silent for a moment, embarrassed by the implication. Somehow this handsome,sedately dressed woman sitting in the darkness of the carriage didnt look and talk as she imagineda bad woman, the Madam of a House, should look and talk. She sounded likewell, a littlecommon and countrified but nice and warm hearted.

You were wonderful before the provost marshal today, Mrs. Watling! You and the otheryourthe young ladies certainly saved our mens lives.

Mr. Wilkes was the wonderful one. I dont know how he even stood up and told his story, muchless look as cool as he done. He was sure bleedin like a pig when I seen him last night. Is he goin

to be all right, Miz Wilkes?

Yes, thank you. The doctor says its just a flesh wound, though he did lose a tremendous lot ofblood. This morning he waswell, he was pretty well laced with brandy or hed never have hadthe strength to go through with it all so well. But it was you, Mrs. Watling, who saved them. Whenyou got mad and talked about the broken mirrors you sounded soso convincing.

Thank you, Mam. But II thought Captain Butler done mighty fine too, said Belle, shy pridein her voice.

Oh, he was wonderful! cried Melanie warmly. The Yankees couldnt help but believe histestimony. He was so smart about the whole affair. I can never thank him enoughor you either!

How good and kind you are!

Thank you kindly, Miz Wilkes. It was a pleasure to do it II hope it aint goin to embarrassyou none, me sayin Mr. Wilkes come regular to my place. He never, you know

Yes, I know. No, it doesnt embarrass me at all. Im just so grateful to you.

Ill bet the other ladies aint grateful to me, said Belle with sudden venom. And Ill bet theyaint grateful to Captain Butler neither. Ill bet theyll hate him just this much more. Ill bet youllbe the only lady who even says thanks to me. Ill bet they wont even look me in the eye whenthey see me on the street. But I dont care. I wouldnt of minded if all their husbands got hung, ButI did mind about Mr. Wilkes. You see I aint forgot how nice you was to me durin the war, aboutthe money for the hospital. There aint never been a lady in this town nice to me like you was and Idont forget a kindness. And I thought about you bein left a widder with a little boy if Mr. Wilkesgot hung andhes a nice little boy, your boy is, Miz Wilkes. I got a boy myself and so I

Oh, you have? Does he liveer

Oh, nom! He aint here in Atlanta. He aint never been here. Hes off at school. I aint seenhim since he was little. Iwell, anyway, when Captain Butler wanted me to lie for those men Iwanted to know who the men was and when I heard Mr. Wilkes was one I never hesitated. I said tomy girls, I said, Ill whale the livin daylights out of you all if you dont make a special point ofsayin you was with Mr. Wilkes all evenin.

Oh! said Melanie, still more embarrassed by Belles offhand reference to her girls. Oh, thatwaserkind of you andof them, too.

No moren you deserve, said Belle warmly. But I wouldnt of did it for just anybody. If it hadbeen that Miz Kennedys husband by hisself, I wouldnt of lifted a finger, no matter what CaptainButler said.

Why?

Well, Miz Wilkes, people in my business knows a heap of things. Itd surprise and shock a heapof fine ladies if they had any notion how much we knows about them. And she aint no good, MizWilkes. She kilt her husband and that nice Wellburn boy, same as if she shot them. She caused itall, prancin about Atlanta by herself, enticin niggers and trash. Why, not one of my girls

You must not say unkind things about my sister-in-law. Melanie stiffened coldly.

Belle put an eager placating hand on Melanies arm and then hastily withdrew it.

Dont freeze me, please, Miz Wilkes. I couldnt stand it after you been so kind and sweet to me.

I forgot how you liked her and Im sorry for what I said. Im sorry about poor Mr. Kennedy bein

dead too. He was a nice man. I used to buy some of the stuff for my house from him and he alwaystreated me pleasant. But Miz Kennedywell, she just aint in the same class with you, MizWilkes. Shes a mighty cold woman and I cant help it if I think so. ... When are they goin to buryMr. Kennedy?

Tomorrow morning. And you are wrong about Mrs. Kennedy. Why, this very minute shesprostrated with grief.

Maybe so, said Belle with evident disbelief. Well, I got to be goin. Im afraid somebodymight recognize this carriage if I stayed here longer and that wouldnt do you no good. And, MizWilkes, if you ever see me on the street, youyou dont have to speak to me. Ill understand.

I shall be proud to speak to you. Proud to be under obligation to you. I hopeI hope we meetagain.

No, said Belle. That wouldnt be fittin. Good night.

Chapter 47

SCARLETT SAT in her bedroom, picking at the supper tray Mammy had brought her, listeningto the wind hurling itself out of the night. The house was frighteningly still, quieter even than whenFrank had lain in the parlor just a few hours before. Then there had been tiptoeing feet and hushedvoices, muffled knocks on the door, neighbors rustling in to whisper sympathy and occasional sobsfrom Franks sister who had come up from Jonesboro for the funeral.

But now the house was cloaked in silence. Although her door was open she could hear nosounds from below stairs. Wade and the baby had been at Melanies since Franks body wasbrought home and she missed the sound of the boys feet and Ellas gurgling. There was a truce inthe kitchen and no sound of quarreling from Peter, Mammy and Cookie floated up to her. EvenAunt Pitty, downstairs in the library, was not rocking her creaking chair in deference to Scarletts sorrow.

No one intruded upon her, believing that she wished to be left alone with her grief, but to be leftalone was the last thing Scarlett desired. Had it only been grief that companioned her, she couldhave borne it as she had borne other griefs. But, added to her stunned sense of loss at Franksdeath, were fear and remorse and the torment of a suddenly awakened conscience. For the firsttime in her life she regretting things she had done, regretting them with a sweeping superstitiousfearthatmad(was) e her cast sidelong glances at the bed upon which she had lain withFrank.

She had killed Frank. She had killed him just as surely as if it had been her finger that pulled thetrigger. He had begged her not to go about alone but she had not listened to him. And now he wasdead because of her obstinacy. God would punish her for that. But there lay upon her conscienceanother matter that was heavier and more frightening even than causing his deatha matter whichhad never troubled her until she looked upon his coffined face. There had been something helplessand pathetic in that still face which had accused her. God would punish her for marrying him whenhe really loved Suellen. She would have to cower at the seat of judgment and answer for that lieshe told him coming back from the Yankee camp in his buggy.

Useless for her to argue now that the end justified the means, that she was driven into trappinghim, that the fate of too many people hung on her for her to consider either his or Suellens rightsand happiness. The truth stood out boldly and she cowered away from it. She had married himcoldly and used him coldly. And she had made him unhappy during the last six months when shecould have made him very happy. God would punish her for not being nicer to himpunish herfor all her bullyings and proddings and storms of temper and cutting remarks, for alienating hisfriends and shaming him by operating the mills and building the saloon and leasing convicts.

She had made him very unhappy and she knew it, but he had borne it all like a gentleman. Theonly thing she had ever done that gave him any real happiness was to present him with Ella. Andshe knew if she could have kept from having Ella, Ella would never have been born.

She shivered, frightened, wishing Frank were alive, so she could be nice to him, so very nice tohim to make up for it all. Oh, if only God did not seem so furious and vengeful! Oh, if only theminutes did not go by so slowly and the house were not so still! If only she were not so alone!

If only Melanie were with her, Melanie could calm her fears. But Melanie was at home, nursingAshley. For a moment Scarlett thought of summoning Pittypat to stand between her and herconscience but she hesitated. Pitty would probably make matters worse, for she honestly mournedFrank. He had been more her contemporary than Scarletts and she had been devoted to him. Hehad filled to perfection Pittys need for a man in the house, for he brought her little presents andharmless gossip, jokes and stories, read the paper to her at night and explained topics of the day toher while she mended his socks. She had fussed over him and planned special dishes for him andcoddled him during his innumerable colds. Now she missed him acutely and repeated over andover as she dabbed at her red swollen eyes: If only he hadnt gone out with the Klan!

If there were only someone who could comfort her, quiet her fears, explain to her just what werethese confused fears which made her heart sink with such cold sickness! If only Ashleybut sheshrank from the thought. She had almost killed Ashley, just as she had killed Frank. And if Ashley ever knew the real truth about how she lied to Frank to get him, knew how mean she had been toFrank, he could never love her any more. Ashley was so honorable, so truthful, so kind and he sawso straightly, so clearly. If he knew the whole truth, he would understand. Oh, yes, he wouldunderstand only too well! But he would never love her any more. So he must never know the truthbecause he must keep on loving her. How could she live if that secret source of her strength, hislove, were taken from her? But what a relief it would be to put her head on his shoulder and cryand unburden her guilty heart!

The still house with the sense of death heavy upon it pressed about her loneliness until she feltshe could not bear it unaided any longer. She arose cautiously, pushed her door half-closed andthen dug about in the bottom bureau drawer beneath her underwear. She produced Aunt Pittysswoon bottle of brandy which she had hidden there and held it up to the lamp. It was nearly half-empty. Surely she hadnt drunk that much since last night! She poured a generous amount into herwater glass and gulped it down. She would have to put the bottle back in the cellaret beforemorning, filled to the top with water. Mammy had hunted for it, just before the funeral when thepallbearers wanted a drink, and already the air in the kitchen was electric with suspicion betweenMammy, Cookie and Peter.

The brandy burned with fiery pleasantness. There was nothing like it when you needed it. Infact, brandy was good almost any time, so much better than insipid wine. Why on earth should itbe proper for a woman to drink wine and not spirits? Mrs. Merriwether and Mrs. Meade hadsniffed her breath most obviously at the funeral and she had seen the triumphant look they hadexchanged. The old cats!

She poured another drink. It wouldnt matter if she did get a little tipsy tonight for she was goingto bed soon and she could gargle cologne before Mammy came up to unlace her. She wished shecould get as completely and thoughtlessly drunk as Gerald used to get on Court Day. Then perhapsshe could forget Franks sunken face accusing her of ruining his life and then killing him.

She wondered if everyone in town thought she had killed him. Certainly the people at thefuneral had been cold to her. The only people who had put any warmth into their expressions ofsympathy were the wives of the Yankee officers with whom she did business. Well, she didnt carewhat the town said about her. How unimportant that seemed beside what she would have to answerfor to God!

She took another drink at the thought, shuddering as the hot brandy went down her throat. Shefelt very warm now but still she couldnt get the thought of Frank out of her mind. What fools menwere when they said liquor made people forget! Unless she drank herself into insensibility, shedstill see Franks face as it had looked the last time he begged her not to drive alone, timid,reproachful, apologetic.

The knocker on the front door hammered with a dull sound that made the still house echo andshe heard Aunt Pittys waddling steps crossing the hall and the door opening. There was the soundof greeting and an indistinguishable murmur. Some neighbor calling to discuss the funeral or tobring a blanc mange. Pitty would like that. She had taken an important and melancholy pleasure intalking to the condolence callers.

She wondered incuriously who it was and, when a mans voice, resonant and drawling, rose above Pittys funereal whispering, she knew. Gladness and relief flooded her. It was Rhett. She hadnot seen him since he broke the news of Franks death to her, and now she knew, deep in her heart,that he was the one person who could help her tonight.

I think shell see me, Rhetts voice floated up to her.

But she is lying down now, Captain Butler, and wont see anyone. Poor child, she is quiteprostrated. She

I think she will see me. Please tell her I am going away tomorrow and may be gone some time.

Its very important.

But fluttered Aunt Pittypat.

Scarlett ran out into the hall, observing with some astonishment that her knees were a littleunsteady, and leaned over the banisters.

Ill be down terrectly, Rhett, she called.

She had a glimpse of Aunt Pittypats plump upturned face, her eyes owlish with surprise anddisapproval. Now itll be all over town that I conducted myself most improperly on the day of myhusbands funeral, thought Scarlett, as she hurried back to her room and began smoothing her hair.

She buttoned her black basque up to the chin and pinned down the collar with Pittypats mourningbrooch. I dont look very pretty she thought, leaning toward the mirror, too white and scared. For amoment her hand went toward the lock box where she kept her rouge hidden but she decidedagainst it. Poor Pittypat would be upset in earnest if she came downstairs pink and blooming. Shepicked up the cologne bottle and took a large mouthful, carefully rinsed her mouth and then spitinto the slop jar.

She rustled down the stairs toward the two who still stood in the hall, for Pittypat had been tooupset by Scarletts action to ask Rhett to sit down. He was decorously clad in black, his linen frillyand starched, and his manner was all that custom demanded from an old friend paying a call ofsympathy on one bereaved. In fact, it was so perfect that it verged on the burlesque, thoughPittypat did not see it. He was properly apologetic for disturbing Scarlett and regretted that in hisrush of closing up business before leaving town he had been unable to be present at the funeral.

Whatever possessed him to come? wondered Scarlett. He doesnt mean a word hes saying.

I hate to intrude on you at this time but I have a matter of business to discuss that will not wait.

Something that Mr. Kennedy and I were planning

I didnt know you and Mr. Kennedy had business dealings, said Aunt Pittypat, almostindignant that some of Franks activities were unknown to her.

Mr. Kennedy was a man of wide interests, said Rhett respectfully. Shall we go into theparlor?

No! cried Scarlett, glancing at the closed folding doors. She could still see the coffin in thatroom. She hoped she never had to enter it again. Pitty, for once, took a hint, although with none toogood grace.

Do use the library. I mustI must go upstairs and get out the mending. Dear me, Ive neglected it so this last week. I declare

She went up the stairs with a backward look of reproach which was noticed by neither Scarlettnor Rhett. He stood aside to let her pass before him into the library.

What business did you and Frank have? she questioned abruptly.

He came closer and whispered. None at all. I just wanted to get Miss Pitty out of the way. Hepaused as he leaned over her. Its no good, Scarlett.

What?

The cologne.

Im sure I dont know what you mean.

Im sure you do. Youve been drinking pretty heavily.

Well, what if I have? Is it any of your business?

The soul of courtesy, even in the depths of sorrow. Dont drink alone, Scarlett. People alwaysfind it out and it ruins the reputation. And besides, its a bad business, this drinking alone. Whatsthe matter, honey?

He led her to the rosewood sofa and she sat down in silence.

May I close the doors?

She knew if Mammy saw the closed doors she would be scandalized and would lecture andgrumble about it for days, but it would be still worse if Mammy should overhear this discussion ofdrinking, especially in light of the missing brandy bottle. She nodded and Rhett drew the slidingdoors together. When he came back and sat down beside her, his dark eyes alertly searching herface, the pall of death receded before the vitality he radiated and the room seemed pleasant andhome-like again, the lamps rosy and warm.

Whats the matter, honey?

No one in the world could say that foolish word of endearment as caressingly as Rhett, evenwhen he was joking, but he did not look as if he were joking now. She raised tormented eyes to hisface and somehow found comfort in the blank inscrutability she saw there. She did not know whythis should be, for he was such an unpredictable, callous person. Perhaps it was because, as he oftensaid, they were so much alike. Sometimes she thought that all the people she had ever knownwere strangers except Rhett.

Cant you tell me? he took her hand, oddly gentle. Its more than old Frank leaving you? Doyou need money?

Money? God, no! Oh, Rhett, Im so afraid.

Dont be a goose, Scarlett, youve never been afraid in your life.

Oh, Rhett, I am afraid!

The words bubbled up faster than she could speak them. She could tell him. She could tell Rhettanything. Hed been so bad himself that he wouldnt sit in judgment on her. How wonderful to know someone who was bad and dishonorable and a cheat and a liar, when all the world was filledwith people who would not lie to save their souls and who would rather starve than do a dishonorabledeed!

Im afraid Ill die and go to hell.

If he laughed at her she would die, right then. But he did not laugh.

You are pretty healthyand maybe there isnt any hell after all.

Oh, but there is, Rhett! You know there is!

I know there is but its right here on earth. Not after we die. Theres nothing after we die,Scarlett. You are having your hell now.

Oh, Rhett, thats blasphemous!

But singularly comforting. Tell me, why are you going to hell?

He was teasing now, she could see the glint in his eyes but she did not mind. His hands felt sowarm and strong, so comforting to cling to.

Rhett, I oughtnt to have married Frank. It was wrong. He was Suellens beau and he loved her,not me. But I lied to him and told him she was going to marry Tony Fontaine. Oh, how could Ihave done it?

Ah, so that was how it came about! I always wondered.

And then I made him so miserable. I made him do all sorts of things he didnt want to do, likemaking people pay their bills when they really couldnt afford to pay them. And it hurt him sowhen I ran the mills and built the saloon and leased convicts. He could hardly hold up his head forshame. And Rhett, I killed him. Yes, I did! I didnt know he was in the Klan. I never dreamed hehad that much gumption. But I ought to have known. And I killed him.

Will all great Neptunes ocean wash this blood clean from my hand?

What?

No matter. Go on.

Go on? Thats all. Isnt it enough? I married him, I made him unhappy and I killed him. Oh, myGod! I dont see how I could have done it! I lied to him and I married him. It all seemed so rightwhen I did it but now I see how wrong it was. Rhett, it doesnt seem like it was me who did allthese things. I was so mean to him but Im not really mean. I wasnt raised that way. Mother

She stopped and swallowed. She had avoided thinking of Ellen all day but she could no longer blotout her image.

I often wondered what she was like. You seemed to me so like your father.

Mother was Oh, Rhett, for the first time Im glad shes dead, so she cant see me. She didntraise me to be mean. She was so kind to everybody, so good. Shed rather Id have starved thandone this. And I so wanted to be just like her in every way and Im not like her one bit I hadntthought of thattheres been so much else to think aboutbut I wanted to be like her. I didntwant to be like Pa. I loved him but he wassoso thoughtless. Rhett, sometimes I did try so hard to be nice to people and kind to Frank, but then the nightmare would come back and scare me sobad Id want to rush out and just grab money away from people, whether it was mine or not.

Tears were streaming unheeded down her face and she clutched his hand so hard that her nailsdug into his flesh.

What nightmare? His voice was calm and soothing.

OhI forgot you didnt know. Well, just when I would try to be nice to folks and tell myselfthat money wasnt everything, Id go to bed and dream that I was back at Tara right after Motherdied, right after the Yankees went through. Rhett, you cant imagine I get cold when I thinkabout it. I can see how everything is burned and so still and theres nothing to eat. Oh, Rhett, in mydream Im hungry again.

Go on.

Im hungry and everybody, Pa and the girls and the darkies, are starving and they keep sayingover and over: Were hungry and Im so empty it hurts, and so frightened. My mind keepssaying: If I ever get out of this, Ill never, never be hungry again and then the dream goes off intoa gray mist and Im running, running in the mist, running so hard my hearts about to burst andsomething is chasing me, and I cant breathe but I keep thinking that if I can just get there, Ill besafe. But I dont know where Im trying to get to. And then Id wake up and Id be cold with frightand so afraid that Id be hungry again. When I wake up from that dream, it seems like theres notenough money in the world to keep me from being afraid of being hungry again. And then Frankwould be so mealy mouthed and slow poky that he would make me mad and Id lose my temper.

He didnt understand, I guess, and I couldnt make him understand. I kept thinking that Id make itup to him some day when we had money and I wasnt so afraid of being hungry. And now hesdead and its too late. Oh, it seemed so right when I did it but it was all so wrong. If I had it to doover again, Id do it so differently.

Hush, he said, disentangling her frantic grip and pulling a clean handkerchief from his pocket.

Wipe your face. There is no sense in your tearing yourself to pieces this way.

She took the handkerchief and wiped her damp cheeks, a little relief stealing over her as if shehad shifted some of her burden to his broad shoulders. He looked so capable and calm and even theslight twist of his mouth was comforting as though it proved her agony and confusionunwarranted.

Feel better now? Then lets get to the bottom of this. You say if you had it to do over again,youd do it differently. But would you? Think, now. Would you?

Well

No, youd do the same things again. Did you have any other choice?

No.

Then what are you sorry about?

I was so mean and now hes dead.

And if he wasnt dead, youd still be mean. As I understand it, you are not really sorry for marrying Frank and bullying him and inadvertently causing his death. You are only sorry becauseyou are afraid of going to hell. Is that right?

Wellthat sounds so mixed up.

Your ethics are considerably mixed up too. You are in the exact position of a thief whos beencaught red handed and isnt sorry he stole but is terribly, terribly sorry hes going to jail.

A thief

Oh, dont be so literal! In other words if you didnt have this silly idea that you were damned tohell fire eternal, youd think you were well rid of Frank.

Oh, Rhett!

Oh, come! You are confessing and you might as well confess the truth as a decorous lie. Didyourerconscience bother you much when you offered toshall we saypart with that jewelwhich is dearer than life for three hundred dollars?

The brandy was spinning in her head now and she felt giddy and a little reckless. What was theuse in lying to him? He always seemed to read her mind.

I really didnt think about God much thenor hell. And when I did thinkwell, I justreckoned God would understand.

But you dont credit God with understanding why you married Frank?

Rhett, how can you talk so about God when you know you dont believe there is one?

But you believe in a God of Wrath and thats whats important at present. Why shouldnt theLord understand? Are you sorry you still own Tara and there arent Carpetbaggers living there? Areyou sorry you arent hungry and ragged?

Oh, no!

Well, did you have any alternative except marrying Frank?

No.

He didnt have to marry you, did he? Men are free agents. And he didnt have to let you bullyhim into doing things he didnt want to, did he?

Well

Scarlett, why worry about it? If you had it to do over again you would be driven to the lie andhe to marrying you. You would still have run yourself into danger and he would have had toavenge you. If he had married Sister Sue, she might not have caused his death but shed probablyhave made him twice as unhappy as you did. It couldnt have happened differently.

But I could have been nicer to him.

You could have beenif youd been somebody else. But you were born to bully anyone wholllet you do it. The strong were made to bully and the weak to knuckle under. Its all Franks faultfor not beating you with a buggy whip. ... Im surprised at you, Scarlett, for sprouting a consciencethis late in life. Opportunists like you shouldnt have them.

What is an opporwhat did you call it?

A person who takes advantage of opportunities.

Is that wrong?

It has always been held in disreputeespecially by those who had the same opportunities anddidnt take them.

Oh, Rhett, you are joking and I thought you were going to be nice!

I am being nicefor me. Scarlett, darling, you are tipsy. Thats whats the matter with you.

You dare

Yes, I dare. You are on the verge of what is vulgarly called a crying jag and so I shall changethe subject and cheer you up by telling you some news that will amuse you. In fact, thats why Icame here this evening, to tell you my news before I went away.

Where are you going?

To England and I may be gone for months. Forget your conscience, Scarlett. I have no intentionof discussing your souls welfare any further. Dont you want to hear my news?

But she began feebly and paused. Between the brandy which was smoothing out the harshcontours of remorse and Rhetts mocking but comforting words, the pale specter of Frank wasreceding into shadows. Perhaps Rhett was right. Perhaps God did understand. She recoveredenough to push the idea from the top of her mind and decide: Ill think about it all tomorrow.

Whats your news? she said with an effort, blowing her nose on his handkerchief and pushingback the hair that had begun to straggle.

My news is this, he answered, grinning down at her. I still want you more than any womanIve ever seen and now that Franks gone, I thought youd be interested to know it.

Scarlett jerked her hands away from his grasp and sprang to her feet.

Iyou are the most ill-bred man in the world, coming here at this time of all times with yourfilthyI should have known youd never change. And Frank hardly cold! If you had any decency Will you leave this

Do be quiet or youll have Miss Pittypat down here in a minute, he said, not rising butreaching up and taking both her fists. Im afraid you miss my point.

Miss your point? I dont miss anything. She pulled against his grip. Turn me loose and getout of here. I never heard of such bad taste. I

Hush, he said. I am asking you to marry me. Would you be convinced if I knelt down?

She said Oh breathlessly and sat down hard on the sofa.

She stared at him, her mouth open, wondering if the brandy were playing tricks on her mind,remembering senselessly his jibing: My dear, Im not a marrying man. She was drunk or he wascrazy. But he did not look crazy. He looked as calm as though he were discussing the weather, andhis smooth drawl fell on her ears with no particular emphasis.

I always intended having you, Scarlett, since that first day I saw you at Twelve Oaks when youthrew that vase and swore and proved that you werent a lady. I always intended having you, oneway or another. But as you and Frank have made a little money, I know youll never be driven tome again with any interesting propositions of loans and collaterals. So I see Ill have to marryyou.

Rhett Butler, is this one of your vile jokes?

I bare my soul and you are suspicious! No, Scarlett, this is a bona fide honorable declaration. Iadmit that its not in the best of taste, coming at this time, but I have a very good excuse for mylack of breeding. Im going away tomorrow for a long time and I fear that if I wait till I returnyoull have married some one else with a little money. So I thought, why not me and my money?

Really, Scarlett, I cant go all my life, waiting to catch you between husbands.

He meant it. There was no doubt about it. Her mouth was dry as she assimilated this knowledgeand she swallowed and looked into his eyes, trying to find some clue. They were full of laughterbut there was something else, deep in them, which she had never seen before, a gleam that defiedanalysis. He sat easily, carelessly but she felt that he was watching her as alertly as a cat watches amouse hole. There was a sense of leashed power straining beneath his calm that made her drawback, a little frightened.

He was actually asking her to marry him; he was committing the incredible. Once she hadplanned how she would torment him should he ever propose. Once she had thought that if he everspoke those words she would humble him and make him feel her power and take a maliciouspleasure in doing it. Now, he had spoken and the plans did not even occur to her, for he was nomore in her power than he had ever been. In fact, he held the whip hand of the situation socompletely that she was as flustered as a girl at her first proposal and she could only blush andstammer.

II shall never marry again.

Oh, yes, you will. You were born to be married. Why not me?

But Rhett, II dont love you.

That should be no drawback. I dont recall that love was prominent in your other twoventures.

Oh, how can you? You know I was fond of Frank!

He said nothing.

I was! I was!

Well, we wont argue that. Will you think over my proposition while Im gone?

Rhett, I dont like for things to drag on. Id rather tell you now. Im going home to Tara soonand India Wilkes will stay with Aunt Pittypat. I want to go home for a long spell andII dontever want to get married again.

Nonsense. Why?

Oh, wellnever mind why. I just dont like being married.

But, my poor child, youve never really, been married. How can you know? Ill admit youvehad bad luckonce for spite and once for money. Did you ever think of marryingjust for the funof it?

Fun! Dont talk like a fool. Theres no fun being married.

No? Why not?

A measure of calm had returned and with it all the natural bluntness which brandy brought to thesurface.

Its fun for menthough God knows why. I never could understand it. But all a woman getsout of it is something to eat and a lot of work and having to put up with a mans foolishnessand ababy every year.

He laughed so loudly that the sound echoed in the stillness and Scarlett heard the kitchen dooropen.

Hush! Mammy has ears like a lynx and it isnt decent to laugh so soon afterhush laughing.

You know its true. Fun! Fiddle-dee-dee!

I said youd had bad luck and what youve just said proves it. Youve been married to a boyand to an old man. And into the bargain Ill bet your mother told you that women must bear thesethings because of the compensating joys of motherhood. Well, thats all wrong. Why not trymarrying a fine young man who has a bad reputation and a way with women? Itll be fun.

You are coarse and conceited and I think this conversation has gone far enough. Itsits quitevulgar.

And quite enjoyable, too, isnt it? Ill wager you never discussed the marital relation with aman before, even Charles or Frank.

She scowled at him. Rhett knew too much. She wondered where he had learned all he knewabout women. It wasnt decentDont frown. Name the day, Scarlett. Im not urging instant matrimony because of yourreputation. Well wait the decent interval. By the way, just how long is a decent interval?

I havent said Id marry you. It isnt decent to even talk of such things at such a time.

Ive told you why Im talking of them. Im going away tomorrow and Im too ardent a lover torestrain my passion any longer. But perhaps Ive been too precipitate in my wooing.

With a suddenness that startled her, he slid off the sofa onto his knees and with one hand placeddelicately over his heart, he recited rapidly:

Forgive me for startling you with the impetuosity of my sentiments, my dear ScarlettI mean,my dear Mrs. Kennedy. It cannot have escaped your notice that for some time past the friendship Ihave had in my heart for you has ripened into a deeper feeling, a feeling more beautiful, more pure,more sacred. Dare I name it you? Ah! It is love which makes me so bold!

Do get up, she entreated. You look such a fool and suppose Mammy should come in and seeyou?

She would be stunned and incredulous at the first signs of my gentility, said Rhett, arisinglightly. Come, Scarlett, you are no child, no schoolgirl to put me off with foolish excuses aboutdecency and so forth. Say youll marry me when I come back or, before God, I wont go. Ill stayaround here and play a guitar under your window every night and sing at the top of my voice andcompromise you, so youll have to marry me to save your reputation.

Rhett, do be sensible. I dont want to marry anybody.

No? You arent telling me the real reason. It cant be girlish timidity. What is it?

Suddenly she thought of Ashley, saw him as vividly as though he stood beside her, sunny haired,drowsy eyed, full of dignity, so utterly different from Rhett. He was the real reason she did notwant to marry again, although she had no objections to Rhett and at times was genuinely fond ofhim. She belonged to Ashley, forever and ever. She had never belonged to Charles or Frank, couldnever really belong to Rhett. Every part of her, almost everything she had ever done, striven after,attained, belonged to Ashley, were done because she loved him. Ashley and Tara, she belonged tothem. The smiles, the laughter, the kisses she had given Charles and Frank were Ashleys, eventhough he had never claimed them, would never claim them. Somewhere deep in her was thedesire to keep herself for him, although she knew he would never take her.

She did not know that her face had changed, that reverie had brought a softness to her facewhich Rhett had never seen before. He looked at the slanting green eyes, wide and misty, and thetender curve of her lips and for a moment his breath stopped. Then his mouth went down violentlyat one corner and he swore with passionate impatience.

Scarlett OHara, youre a fool!

Before she could withdraw her mind from its far places, his arms were around her, as sure andhard as on the dark road to Tara, so long ago. She felt again the rush of helplessness, the sinkingyielding, the surging tide of warmth that left her limp. And the quiet face of Ashley Wilkes wasblurred and drowned to nothingness. He bent back her head across his arm and kissed her, softly atfirst, and then with a swift gradation of intensity that made her cling to him as the only solid thingin a dizzy swaying world. His insistent mouth was parting her shaking lips, sending wild tremorsalong her nerves, evoking from her sensations she had never known she was capable of feeling.

And before a swimming giddiness spun her round and round, she knew that she was kissing himback.

Stopplease, Im faint! she whispered, trying to turn her head weakly from him. He pressedher head back hard against his shoulder and she had a dizzy glimpse of his face. His eyes werewide and blazing queerly and the tremor in his arms frightened her.

I want to make you faint. I will make you faint. Youve had this coming to you for years. Noneof the fools youve known have kissed you like thishave they? Your precious Charles or Frankor your stupid Ashley

Please

I said your stupid Ashley. Gentlemen allwhat do they know about women? What did theyknow about you? I know you.

His mouth was on hers again and she surrendered without a struggle, too weak even to turn herhead, without even the desire to turn it, her heart shaking her with its poundings, fear of hisstrength and her nerveless weakness sweeping her. What was he going to do? She would faint if hedid not stop. If he would only stopif he would never stop.

Say Yes! His mouth was poised above hers and his eyes were so close that they seemedenormous, filling the world. Say Yes, damn you, or

She whispered Yes before she even thought. It was almost as if he had willed the word andshe had spoken it without her own volition. But even as she spoke it, a sudden calm fell on herspirit, her head began to stop spinning and even the giddiness of the brandy was lessened. She hadpromised to marry him when she had had no intention of promising. She hardly knew how it hadall come about but she was not sorry. It now seemed very natural that she had said Yesalmost asif by divine intervention, a hand stronger than hers was about her affairs, settling her problems forher.

He drew a quick breath as she spoke and bent as if to kiss her again and her eyes closed and herhead fell back. But he drew back and she was faintly disappointed. It made her feel so strange to bekissed like this and yet there was something exciting about it.

He sat very still for a while holding her head against his shoulder and, as if by effort, thetrembling of his arms ceased. He moved away from her a little and looked down at her. She openedher eyes and saw that the frightening glow had gone from his face. But somehow she could notmeet his gaze and she dropped her eyes in a rush of tingling confusion.

When he spoke his voice was very calm.

You meant it? You dont want to take it back?

No.

Its not just because Ivewhat is the phrase?swept you off your feet by myerardor?

She could not answer for she did not know what to say, nor could she meet his eyes. He put ahand under her chin and lifted her face.

I told you once that I could stand anything from you except a lie. And now I want the truth. Justwhy did you say Yes?

Still the words would not come, but, a measure of poise returning, she kept her eyes demurelydown and tucked the corners of her mouth into a little smile.

Look at me. Is it my money?

Why, Rhett! What a question!

Look up and dont try to sweet talk me. Im not Charles or Frank or any of the County boys tobe taken in by your fluttering lids. Is it my money?

Wellyes, a part.

A part?

He did not seem annoyed. He drew a swift breath and with an effort wiped from his eyes the eagerness her words had brought, an eagerness which she was too confused to see.

Well, she floundered helplessly, money does help, you know, Rhett, and God knows Frankdidnt leave any too much. But thenwell, Rhett, we do get on, you know. And you are the onlyman I ever saw who could stand the truth from a woman, and it would be nice having a husbandwho didnt think me a silly fool and expect me to tell liesandwell, I am fond of you.

Fond of me?

Well, she said fretfully, if I said I was madly in love with you, Id be lying and whats more,youd know it.

Sometimes I think you carry your truth telling too far, my pet. Dont you think, even if it was alie, that it would be appropriate for you to say I love you, Rhett, even if you didnt mean it?

What was he driving at, she wondered, becoming more confused. He looked so queer, eager,hurt, mocking. He took his hands from her and shoved them deep in his trousers pockets and shesaw him ball his fists.

If it costs me a husband, Ill tell the truth, she thought grimly, her blood up as always when hebaited her.

Rhett, it would be a lie, and why should we go through all that foolishness? Im fond of you,like I said. You know how it is. You told me once that you didnt love me but that we had a lot incommon. Both rascals, was the way you

Oh, God! be whispered rapidly, turning his head away. To be taken in my own trap!

What did you say?

Nothing, and he looked at her and laughed, but it was not a pleasant laugh; Name the day, mydear, and he laughed again and bent and kissed her hands. She was relieved to see his mood passand good humor apparently return, so she smiled too.

He played with her hand for a moment and grinned up at her.

Did you ever in your novel reading come across the old situation of the disinterested wifefalling in love with her own husband?

You know I dont read novels, she said and, trying to equal his jesting mood, went on:

Besides, you once said it was the height of bad form for husbands and wives to love each other.

I once said too God damn many things, he retorted abruptly and rose to his feet.

Dont swear.

Youll have to get used to it and learn to swear too. Youll have to get used to all my bad habits.

Thatll be part of the price of beingfond of me and getting your pretty paws on my money.

Well, dont fly off the handle so, because I didnt lie and make you feel conceited. You arent inlove with me, are you? Why should I be in love with you?

No, my dear, Im not in love with you, no more than you are with me, and if I were, you wouldbe the last person Id ever tell. God help the man who ever really loves you. Youd break his heart,my darling, cruel, destructive little cat who is so careless and confident she doesnt even trouble to sheathe her claws.

He jerked her to her feet and kissed her again, but this time his lips were different for he seemednot to care if he hurt herseemed to want to hurt her, to insult her. His lips slid down to her throatand finally he pressed them against the taffeta over her breast, so hard and so long that his breathburnt to her skin. Her hands struggled up, pushing him away in outraged modesty.

You mustnt! How dare you!

Your hearts going like a rabbits, he said mockingly. All too fast for mere fondness I wouldthink, if I were conceited. Smooth your ruffled feathers. You are just putting on these virginal airs.

Tell me what I shall bring you from England. A ring? What kind would you like?

She wavered momentarily between interest in his last words and a feminine desire to prolong thescene with anger and indignation.

Oha diamond ringand Rhett, do buy a great big one.

So you can flaunt it before your poverty-stricken friends and say See what I caught! Verywell, you shall have a big one, one so big that your less-fortunate friends can comfort themselvesby whispering that its really vulgar to wear such large stones.

He abruptly started off across the room and she followed him, bewildered, to the closed doors.

What is the matter? Where are you going?

To my rooms to finish packing.

Oh, but

But, what?

Nothing. I hope you have a nice trip.

Thank you.

He opened the door and walked into the hall. Scarlett trailed after him, somewhat at a loss, atrifle disappointed as at an unexpected anticlimax. He slipped on his coat and picked up his glovesand hat.

Ill write you. Let me know if you change your mind.

Arent you

Well? He seemed impatient to be off.

Arent you going to kiss me good-by? she whispered, mindful of the ears of the house.

Dont you think youve had enough kissing for one evening? he retorted and grinned down ather. To think of a modest, well-brought-up young woman Well, I told you it would be fun,didnt I?

Oh, you are impossible! she cried in wrath, not caring if Mammy did hear. And I dont care ifyou never come back.

She turned and flounced toward the stairs, expecting to feel his warm hand on her arm, stopping her. But he only pulled open the front door and a cold draft swept in.

But I will come back, he said and went out, leaving her on the bottom step looking at theclosed door.

The ring Rhett brought back from England was large indeed, so large it embarrassed Scarlett towear it. She loved gaudy and expensive jewelry but she had an uneasy feeling that everyone wassaying, with perfect truth, that this ring was vulgar. The central stone was a four-carat diamondand, surrounding it, were a number of emeralds. It reached to the knuckle of her finger and gaveher hand the appearance of being weighted down. Scarlett had a suspicion that Rhett had gone togreat pains to have the ring made up and, for pure meanness, had ordered it made as ostentatious aspossible.

Until Rhett was back in Atlanta and the ring on her finger she told no one, not even her family,of her intentions, and when she did announce her engagement a storm of bitter gossip broke out.

Since the Klan affair Rhett and Scarlett had been, with the exception of the Yankees andCarpetbaggers, the towns most unpopular citizens. Everyone had disapproved of Scarlett since thefar-away day when she abandoned the weeds worn for Charlie Hamilton. Their disapproval hadgrown stronger because of her unwomanly conduct in the matter of the mills, her immodesty inshowing herself when she was pregnant and so many other things. But when she brought about thedeath of Frank and Tommy and jeopardized the lives of a dozen other men, their dislike flamedinto public condemnation.

As for Rhett, he had enjoyed the towns hatred since his speculations during the war and he hadnot further endeared himself to his fellow citizens by his alliances with the Republicans since then.

But, oddly enough, the fact that he had saved the lives of some of Atlantas most prominent menwas what aroused the hottest hate of Atlantas ladies.

It was not that they regretted their men were still alive. It was that they bitterly resented owingthe mens lives to such a man as Rhett and to such an embarrassing trick. For months they hadwrithed under Yankee laughter and scorn, and the ladies felt and said that if Rhett really had thegood of the Klan at heart he would have managed the affair in a more seemly fashion. They said hehad deliberately dragged in Belle Watling to put the nice people of the town in a disgracefulposition. And so he deserved neither thanks for rescuing the men nor forgiveness for his past sins.

These women, so swift to kindness, so tender to the sorrowing, so untiring in times of stress,could be as implacable as furies to any renegade who broke one small law of their unwritten code.

This code was simple. Reverence for the Confederacy, honor to the veterans; loyalty to old forms,pride in poverty, open hands to friends and undying hatred to Yankees. Between them, Scarlett andRhett had outraged every tenet of this code.

The men whose lives Rhett had saved attempted, out of decency and a sense of gratitude, tokeep their women silent but they had little success. Before the announcement of their comingmarriage, the two had been unpopular enough but people could still be polite to them in a formalway. Now even that cold courtesy was no longer possible. The news of their engagement came likean explosion, unexpected and shattering, rocking the town, and even the mildest-mannered womenspoke their minds heatedly. Marrying barely a year after Franks death and she had killed him! Andmarrying that Butler man who owned a brothel and who was in with the Yankees and Carpetbag gers in all kinds of thieving schemes! Separately the two of them could be endured, but the brazencombination of Scarlett and Rhett was too much to be borne. Common and vile, both of them!

They ought to be run out of town!

Atlanta might perhaps have been more tolerant toward the two if the news of their engagementhad not come at a time when Rhetts Carpetbagger and Scalawag cronies were more odious in thesight of respectable citizens than they had ever been before. Public feeling against the Yankees andall their allies was at fever heat at the very time when the town learned of the engagement, for thelast citadel of Georgias resistance to Yankee rule had just fallen. The long campaign which hadbegun when Sherman moved southward from above Dalton, four years before, had finally reachedits climax, and the states humiliation was complete.

Three years of Reconstruction had passed and they had been three years of terrorism. Everyonehad thought that conditions were already as bad as they could ever be. But now Georgia wasdiscovering that Reconstruction at its worst had just begun.

For three years the Federal government had been trying to impose alien ideas and an alien ruleupon Georgia and, with an army to enforce its commands, it had largely succeeded. But only thepower of the military upheld the new regime. The state was under the Yankee rule but not by thestates consent. Georgias leaders had kept on battling for the states right to govern itselfaccording to its own ideas. They had continued resisting all efforts to force them to bow down andaccept the dictates of Washington as their own state law.

Officially, Georgias government had never capitulated but it had been a futile fight, an ever-losing fight. It was a fight that could not win but it had, at least, postponed the inevitable. Alreadymany other Southern states had illiterate negroes in high public office and legislatures dominatedby negroes and Carpetbaggers. But Georgia, by its stubborn resistance, had so far escaped thisfinal degradation. For the greater part of three years, the states capital had remained in the controlof white men and Democrats. With Yankee soldiers everywhere, the state officials could do littlebut protest and resist. Their power was nominal but they had at least been able to keep the stategovernment in the hands of native Georgians. Now even that last stronghold had fallen.

Just as Johnston and his men had been driven back step by step from Dalton to Atlanta, fouryears before, so had the Georgia Democrats been driven back little by little, from 1865 on. Thepower of the Federal government over the states affairs and the lives of its citizens had beensteadily made greater and greater. Force had been piled on top of force and military edicts inincreasing numbers had rendered the civil authority more and more impotent. Finally, with Georgiain the status of a military province, the polls had been ordered thrown open to the negroes, whetherthe states laws permitted it or not.

A week before Scarlett and Rhett announced their engagement, an election for governor hadbeen held. The Southern Democrats had General John B. Gordon, one of Georgias best loved andmost honored citizens, as their candidate. Opposing him was a Republican named Bullock. Theelection had lasted three days instead of one. Trainloads of negroes had been rushed from town totown, voting at every precinct along the way. Of course, Bullock had won.

If the capture of Georgia by Sherman had caused bitterness, the final capture of the statescapitol by the Carpetbaggers, Yankees and negroes caused an intensity of bitterness such as the state had never known before. Atlanta and Georgia seethed and raged.

And Rhett Butler was a friend of the hated Bullock!

Scarlett, with her usual disregard of all matters not directly under her nose, had scarcely knownan election was being held. Rhett had taken no part in the election and his relations with theYankees were no different from what they had always been. But the fact remained that Rhett was aScalawag and a friend of Bullock. And, if the marriage went through, Scarlett also would beturning Scalawag. Atlanta was in no mood to be tolerant or charitable toward anyone in the enemycamp and, the news of the engagement coming when it did, the town remembered all of the evilthings about the pair and none of the good.

Scarlett knew the town was rocking but she did not realize the extent of public feeling until Mrs.

Merriwether, urged on by her church circle, took it upon herself to speak to her for her own good.

Because your own dear mother is dead and Miss Pitty, not being a matron, is not qualified toer, well, to talk to you-upon such a subject, I feel that I must warn you, Scarlett, Captain Butler isnot the kind of a man for any woman of good family to marry. He is a

He managed to save Grandpa Merriwethers neck and your nephews, too.

Mrs. Merriwether swelled. Hardly an hour before she had had an irritating talk with Grandpa.

The old man had remarked that she must not value his hide very much if she did not feel somegratitude to Rhett Butler, even if the man was a Scalawag and a scoundrel.

He only did that as a dirty trick on us all, Scarlett, to embarrass us in front of the Yankees,

Mrs. Merriwether continued. You know as well as I do that the man is a rogue. He always hasbeen and now hes unspeakable. He is simply not the kind of man decent people receive.

No? Thats strange, Mrs. Merriwether. He was in your parlor often enough during the war. Andhe gave Maybelle her white satin wedding dress, didnt he? Or is my memory wrong?

Things are so different during the war and nice people associated with many men who were notquite It was all for the Cause and very proper, too. Surely you cant be thinking of marrying aman who wasnt in the army, who jeered at men who did enlist?

He was, too, in the army. He was in the army eight months. He was in the last campaign andfought at Franklin and was with General Johnston when he surrendered.

I had not heard that, said Mrs. Merriwether and she looked as if she did not believe it either.

But he wasnt wounded, she added, triumphantly.

Lots of men werent.

Everybody who was anybody got wounded. I know no one who wasnt wounded.

Scarlett was goaded.

Then I guess all the men you knew were such fools they didnt know when to come in out of ashower of rainor of minie balls. Now, let me tell you this, Mrs. Merriwether, and you can take itback to your busybody friends. Im going to marry Captain Butler and I wouldnt care if hedfought on the Yankee side.

When that worthy matron went out of the house with her bonnet jerking with rage, Scarlett knewshe had an open enemy now instead of a disapproving friend. But she did not care. Nothing Mrs.

Merriwether could say or do could hurt her. She did not care what anyone saidanyone exceptMammy.

Scarlett had borne with Pittys swooning at the news and had steeled herself to see Ashley looksuddenly old and avoid her eyes as he wished her happiness. She had been amused and irritated atthe letters from Aunt Pauline and Aunt Eulalie in Charleston, horror struck at the news, forbiddingthe marriage, telling her it would not only ruin her social position but endanger theirs. She hadeven laughed when Melanie with a worried pucker in her brows said loyally: Of course, CaptainButler is much nicer than most people realize and he was so kind and clever, the way he savedAshley. And after all, he did fight for the Confederacy. But, Scarlett, dont you think youd betternot decide so hastily?

No, she didnt mind what anybody said, except Mammy. Mammys words were the ones thatmade her most angry and brought the greatest hurtAh has seed you do a heap of things dat would hut Miss Ellen, did she know. An it has donesorrered me a pleny. But disyere is de wust yit. Mahyin trash! Yasm, Ah said trash! Doan gotellin me he come frum fine folkses. Dat doan mek no diffunce. Trash come outer de high places,same as de low, and he trash! Yasm, Miss Scarlett, Ahs seed you tek Mist Charles way frumMiss Honey wen you din keer nuthin bout him. An Ahs seed you rob yo own sister of Mist

Frank. An Ahs heshed mah mouf bout a heap of things you is done, lak sellin po lumber fergood, an lyin bout de other lumber gempmums, an ridin roun by yoseff, exposin yoseff terfree issue niggers an gettin Mist Frank shot, an not feedin dem po convicts nuff ter keep deysouls in dey bodies. Ahs done heshed mah mouf, even ef Miss Ellen in de Promise Lan wuzsayin Mammy, Mammy! You ain look affer mah chile right! Yasm. Ahs stood fer all dat but Ahain gwine stand fer dis, Miss Scarlett. You kain mahy wid trash. Not wile Ah got breaf in mahbody.

I shall marry whom I please, said Scarlett coldly. I think you are forgetting your place,Mammy.

An high time, too! Ef Ah doan say dese wuds ter you, who gwine ter do it?

Ive been thinking the matter over, Mammy, and Ive decided that the best thing for you to dois to go back to Tara. Ill give you some money and

Mammy drew herself up with all her dignity.

Ah is free, Miss Scarlett. You kain sen me nowhar Ah doan wanter go. An wen Ah goes backter Tara, its gwine be wen you goes wid me. Ah ain gwine leave Miss Ellens chile, an dar ain

no way in de worl ter mek me go. An Ah ain gwine leave Miss Ellens granchillun fer no trashystep-pa ter bring up, needer. Hyah Ah is and hyah Ah stays!

I will not have you staying in my house and being rude to Captain Butler. I am going to marryhim and theres no more to be said.

Dar is pleny mo ter be said, retorted Mammy slowly and into her blurred old eyes there camethe light of battle.

But Ah ain never thought ter say it ter none of Miss Ellens blood. But, Miss Scarlett, lissen terme. You ain nuthin but a mule in hawse harness. You kin polish a mules feet an shine his hidean put brass all over his harness an hitch him ter a fine cahige. But he a mule jes de same. Hedoan fool nobody. An you is jes de same. You got silk dresses an de mills an de sto an demoney, an you give yoseff airs lak a fine hawse, but you a mule jes de same. An you ain foolin

nobody, needer. An dat Butler man, he come of good stock and he all slicked up lak a race hawse,but he a mule in hawse harness, jes lak you.

Mammy bent a piercing look on her mistress. Scarlett was speechless and quivering with insult.

Ef you say you gwine mahy him, you gwine do it, cause you is bullhaided lak yo pa. Butmember dis, Miss Scarlett, Ah ain leavin you. Ah gwine stay right hyah an see dis ting thoo.

Without waiting for a reply, Mammy turned and left Scarlett and if she had said: Thou shalt seeme at Philippi! her tones would not have been more ominous.

While they were honeymooning in New Orleans Scarlett told Rhett of Mammys words. To hersurprise and indignation he laughed at Mammys statement about mules in horse harness.

I have never heard a profound truth expressed so succinctly, he said. Mammys a smart oldsoul and one of the few people I know whose respect and good will Id like to have. But, being amule, I suppose Ill never get either from her. She even refused the ten-dollar gold piece which I,in my groomlike fervor, wished to present her after the wedding. Ive seen so few people who didnot melt at the sight of cash. But she looked me in the eye and thanked me and said she wasnt afree issue nigger and didnt need my money.

Why should she take on so? Why should everybody gabble about me like a bunch of guineahens? Its my own affair whom I marry and how often I marry. Ive always minded my ownbusiness. Why dont other people mind theirs?

My pet, the world can forgive practically anything except people who mind their own business.

But why should you squall like a scalded cat? Youve said often enough that you didnt mind whatpeople said about you. Why not prove it? You know youve laid yourself open to criticism so oftenin small matters, you cant expect to escape gossip in this large matter. You knew thered be talk ifyou married a villain like me. If I were a low-bred poverty-stricken villain, people wouldnt be somad. But a rich, flourishing villainof course, thats unforgivable.

I wish youd, be serious sometimes!

I am serious. Its always annoying

Chapter 48

SHE DID HAVE FUN, more fun than she had had since the spring before the war. New Orleanswas such a strange, glamorous place and Scarlett enjoyed it with the headlong pleasure of apardoned life prisoner. The Carpetbaggers were looting the town, many honest folk were drivenfrom their homes and did not know where to look for their next meal, and a negro sat in thelieutenant governors chair. But the New Orleans Rhett showed her was the gayest place she hadever seen. The people she met seemed to have all the money they wanted and no cares at all. Rhettintroduced her to dozens of women, pretty women in bright gowns, women who had soft handsthat showed no signs of hard work, women who laughed at everything and never talked of stupidserious things or hard times. And the men she methow thrilling they were! And how differentfrom Atlanta menand how they fought to dance with her, and paid her the most extravagantcompliments as though she were a young belle.

These men had the same hard reckless look Rhett wore. Their eyes were always alert, like menwho have lived too long with danger to be ever quite careless. They seemed to have no pasts orfutures, and they politely discouraged Scarlett when, to make conversation, she asked what orwhere they were before they came to New Orleans. That, in itself, was strange, for in Atlanta everyrespectable newcomer hastened to present his credentials, to tell proudly of his home and family, totrace the tortuous mazes of relationship that stretched over the entire South.

But these men were a taciturn lot, picking their words carefully. Sometimes when Rhett wasalone with them and Scarlett in the next room, she heard laughter and caught fragments ofconversation that meant nothing to her, scraps of words, puzzling namesCuba and Nassau in theblockade days, the gold rush and claim jumping, gun running and filibustering, Nicaragua andWilliam Walker and how he died against a wall at Truxillo. Once her sudden entrance abruptlyterminated a conversation about what had happened to the members of Quantrills band of guerillas,and she caught the names of Frank and Jesse James.

But they were all well mannered, beautifully tailored, and they evidently admired her, so itmattered little to Scarlett that they chose to live utterly in the present. What really mattered wasthat they were Rhetts friends and had large houses and fine carriages, and they took her and Rhettdriving, invited them to suppers, gave parties in their honor. And Scarlett liked them very well.

Rhett was amused when she told him so.

I thought you would, he said and laughed.

Why not? her suspicions aroused as always by his laughter.

Theyre all second-raters, black sheep, rascals. Theyre all adventurers or Carpetbag aristocrats.

They all made their money speculating in food like your loving husband or out of dubiousgovernment contracts or in shady ways that wont bear investigation.

I dont believe it Youre teasing. Theyre the nicest people ...

The nicest people in town are starving, said Rhett. And living politely in hovels, and I doubtif Id be received in those hovels. You see, my dear, I was engaged in some of my nefariousschemes here during the war and these people have devilish long memories! Scarlett, you are aconstant joy to me. You unerringly manage to pick the wrong people and the wrong things.

But they are your friends!

Oh, but I like rascals. My early youth was spent as a gambler on a river boat and I canunderstand people like that. But Im not blind to what they are. Whereas you he laughed againyou have no instinct about people, no discrimination between the cheap and the great. Sometimes,I think that the only great ladies youve ever associated with were your mother and MissMelly and neither seems to have made any impression on you.

Melly! Why shes as plain as an old shoe and her clothes always look tacky and she never hastwo words to say for herself!

Spare me your jealousy, Madam. Beauty doesnt make a lady, nor clothes a great lady!

Oh, dont they! Just you wait, Rhett Butler, and Ill show you. Now that Iveweve gotmoney, Im going to be the greatest lady you ever saw!

I shall wait with interest, he said.

More exciting than the people she met were the frocks Rhett bought her, superintending thechoice of colors, materials and designs himself. Hoops were out now, and the new styles werecharming with the skirts pulled back from the front and draped over bustles, and on the bustleswere wreaths of Sowers and bows and cascades of lace. She thought of the modest hoops of thewar years and she felt a little embarrassed at these new skirts which undeniably outlined herabdomen. And the darling little bonnets that were not really bonnets at all, but flat little affairsworn over one eye and laden with fruits and flowers, dancing plumes and fluttering ribbons! (Ifonly Rhett had not been so silly and burned the false curls she bought to augment her knot ofIndian-straight hair that peeked from the rear of these little hats!) And the delicate convent-madeunderwear! How lovely it was and how many sets she had! Chemises and nightgowns andpetticoats of the finest linen trimmed with dainty embroidery and infinitesimal tucks. And the satinslippers Rhett bought her! They had heels three inches high and huge glittering paste buckles onthem. And silk stockings, a dozen pairs and not a one had cotton tops! What riches!

She recklessly bought gifts for the family. A furry St. Bernard puppy for Wade, who had alwayslonged for one, a Persian kitten for Beau, a coral bracelet for little Ella, a heavy necklace withmoonstone pendants for Aunt Pitty, a complete set of Shakespeare for Melanie and Ashley, anelaborate livery for Uncle Peter, including a high silk coachmans hat with a brush upon it, dresslengths for Dilcey and Cookie, expensive gifts for everyone at Tara.

But what have you bought for Mammy? questioned Rhett, looking over the pile of gifts spreadout on the bed in their hotel room, and removing the puppy and kitten to the dressing room.

Not a thing. She was hateful. Why should I bring her a present when she called us mules?

Why should you so resent hearing the truth, my pet? You must bring Mammy a present Itwould break her heart if you didntand hearts like hers are too valuable to be broken.

I wont take her a thing. She doesnt deserve it.

Then Ill buy her one. I remember my mammy always said that when she went to Heaven shewanted a taffeta petticoat so stiff that it would stand by itself and so rustly that the Lord God wouldthink it was made of angels wings. Ill buy Mammy some red taffeta and have an elegant petticoatmade.

She wont take it from you. Shed die rather than wear it.

I dont doubt it But Ill make the gesture just the same.

The shops of New Orleans were so rich and exciting and shopping with Rhett was an adventure.

Dining with him was an adventure too, and one more thrilling than shopping, for he knew what toorder and how it should be cooked. The wines and liqueurs and champagnes of New Orleans werenew and exhilarating to her, acquainted with only homemade blackberry and scuppernong vintagesand Aunt Pittys swoon brandy; but oh, the food Rhett ordered! Best of all things in New Orleanswas the food. Remembering the bitter hungry days at Tara and her more recent penury, Scarlett feltthat she could never eat enough of these rich dishes. Gumboes and shrimp Creole, doves in wineand oysters in crumbly patties full of creamy sauce, mushrooms and sweetbreads and turkey livers,fish baked cunningly in oiled paper and limes. Her appetite never dulled, for whenever sheremembered the everlasting goobers and dried peas and sweet potatoes at Tara, she felt an urge togorge herself anew of Creole dishes.

You eat as though each meal were your last, said Rhett. Dont scrape the plate, Scarlett. Imsure theres more in the kitchen. You have only to ask the waiter. If you dont stop being such aglutton, youll be as fat as the Cuban ladies and then I shall divorce you.

But she only put out her tongue at him and ordered another pastry, thick with chocolate andstuffed with meringue.

What fun it was to be able to spend as much money as you liked and not count pennies and feelthat you should save them to pay taxes or buy mules. What fun to be with people who were gayand rich and not genteelly poor like Atlanta people. What fun to wear rustling brocade dresses thatshowed your waist and all your neck and arms and more than a little of your breast and know thatmen were admiring you. And what fun to eat all you wanted without having censorious people sayyou werent ladylike. And what fun to drink all the champagne you pleased. The first time shedrank too much, she was embarrassed when she awoke the next-morning with a splitting headacheand an awful memory of singing Bonnie Blue Flag all the way back to the hotel, through thestreets of New Orleans, in an open carriage. She had never seen a lady even tipsy, and the onlydrunken woman she had ever seen had been that Watling creature on the day when Atlanta fell. Shehardly knew how to face Rhett, so great was her humiliation, but the affair seemed only to amusehim. Everything she did seemed to amuse him, as though she were a gamboling kitten.

It was exciting to go out with him for he was so handsome. Somehow she had never given hislooks a thought before, and in Atlanta everyone had been too preoccupied with his shortcomings ever to talk about his appearance. But here in New Orleans she could see how the eyes of otherwomen followed him and how they fluttered when he bent over their hands. The realization thatother women were attracted by her husband, and perhaps envied her, made her suddenly proud tobe seen by his side.

Why, were a handsome people, thought Scarlett with pleasure.

Yes, as Rhett had prophesied, marriage could be a lot of fun. Not only was it fun but she waslearning many things. That was odd in itself, because Scarlett had thought life could teach her nomore. Now she felt like a child, every day on the brink of a new discovery.

First, she learned that marriage with Rhett was a far different matter from marriage with eitherCharles or Frank. They had respected her and been afraid of her temper. They had begged forfavors and if it pleased her, she had bestowed them. Rhett did not fear her and, she often thought,did not respect her very much either. What he wanted to do, he did, and if she did not like it, helaughed at her. She did not love him but he was undoubtedly an exciting person to live with. Themost exciting thing about him was that even in his outbursts of passion which were flavoredsometimes with cruelty, sometimes with irritating amusement, he seemed always to be holdinghimself under restraint, always riding his emotions with a curb bit.

I guess thats because he isnt really in love with me, she thought and was content enoughwith the state of affairs. I should hate for him to ever turn completely loose in any way. But stillthe thought of the possibility teased her curiosity in an exciting way.

Living with Rhett, she learned many new things about him, and she had thought she knew himso well. She learned that his voice could be as silky as a cats fur one moment and crisp andcrackling with oaths the next. He could tell, with apparent sincerity and approval, stories ofcourage and honor and virtue and love in the odd places he had been, and follow them with ribaldstories of coldest cynicism. She knew no man should tell such stories to his wife but they wereentertaining and they appealed to something coarse and earthy in her. He could be an ardent,almost a tender, lover for a brief while, and almost immediately a mocking devil who ripped the lidfrom her gunpowder temper, fired it and enjoyed the explosion. She learned that his complimentswere always two edged and his tenderest expressions open to suspicion. In fact, in those two weeksin New Orleans, she learned everything about him except what he really was.

Some mornings he dismissed the maid and brought her the breakfast tray himself and fed her asthough she were a child, took the hairbrush from her hand and brushed her long dark hair until itsnapped and crackled. Yet other mornings she was torn rudely out of deep slumber when hesnatched all the bed covers from her and tickled her bare feet. Sometimes he listened withdignified interest to details of her businesses, nodding approval at her sagacity, and at other timeshe called her somewhat dubious tradings scavenging, highway robbery and extortion. He took herto plays and annoyed her by whispering that God probably didnt approve of such amusements,and to churches and, sotto voice, retailed funny obscenities and then reproved her for laughing. Heencouraged her to speak her mind, to be flippant and daring. She picked up from him the gift ofstinging words and sardonic phrases and learned to relish using them for the power they gave herover other people. But she did not possess his sense of humor which tempered his malice, nor hissmile that jeered at himself even while he was jeering others.

He made her play and she had almost forgotten how. Life had been so serious and so bitter. Heknew how to play and swept her along with him. But he never played like a boy; he was a man andno matter what he did, she could never forget it. She could not look down on him from the heightsof womanly superiority, smiling as women have always smiled at the antics of men who are boysat heart.

This annoyed her a little, whenever she thought of it. It would be pleasant to feel superior toRhett. All the other men she had known she could dismiss with a half-contemptuous What achild! Her father, the Tarleton twins with their love of teasing and their elaborate practical jokes,the hairy little Fontaines with their childish rages, Charles, Frank, all the men who had paid courtto her during the wareveryone, in fact except Ashley. Only Ashley and Rhett eluded herunderstanding and her control for they were both adults, and the elements of boyishness werelacking in them.

She did not understand Rhett, nor did she trouble to understand him, though there were thingsabout him which occasionally puzzled her. There was the way he looked at her sometimes, whenhe thought she was unaware. Turning quickly she frequently caught him watching her, an alerteager, waiting look in his eyes.

Why do you look at me like that? she once asked irritably. Like a cat at a mouse hole!

But his face had changed swiftly and he only laughed. Soon she forgot it and did not puzzle herhead about it any more, or about anything concerning Rhett. He was too unpredictable to botherabout and life was very pleasantexcept when she thought of Ashley.

Rhett kept her too busy to think of Ashley often. Ashley was hardly ever in her thoughts duringthe day but at night when she was tired from dancing or her head was spinning from too muchchampagnethen she thought of Ashley. Frequently when she lay drowsily in Rhetts arms withthe moonlight streaming over die bed, she thought how perfect life would be if it were onlyAshleys arms which held her so closely, if it were only Ashley who drew her black hair across hisface and wrapped it about his throat.

Once when she was thinking this, she sighed and turned her head toward the window, and after amoment she felt the heavy arm beneath her neck become like iron, and Rhetts voice spoke in thestillness: May God damn your cheating little soul to hell for all eternity!

And, getting up, he put on his shoes and left the room despite her startled protests and questions.

He reappeared the next morning as she was breakfasting in her room, disheveled, quite drunk andin his wont sarcastic mood, and neither made excuses nor gave an account of his absence.

Scarlett asked no questions and was quite cool to him, as became an injured wife, and when shehad finished the meal, she dressed under his bloodshot gaze and went shopping. He was gonewhen she returned and did not appear again until time for supper.

It was a silent meal and Scarletts temper was straining because it was her last supper in NewOrleans and she wanted to do justice to the crawfish. And she could not enjoy it under his gaze.

Nevertheless she ate large one, and drank quantity of champagne. Perhaps it was this combinationthatbrough(a) tbackheroldnightmare(a) that evening, for she awoke, cold with sweat,sobbing brokenly. She was back at Tara again and Tara was desolate. Mother was dead and with her all the strength and wisdom of the world. Nowhere in the world was there anyone to turn to,anyone to rely upon. And something terrifying was pursuing her and she was running, running tillher heart was bursting, running in a thick swimming fog, crying out, blindly seeking that nameless,unknown haven of safety that was somewhere in the mist about her.

Rhett was leaning over her when she woke, and without a word he picked her up in his arms likea child and held her close, his hard muscles comforting, his wordless murmuring soothing, untilher sobbing ceased.

Oh, Rhett, I was so cold and so hungry and so tired and I couldnt find it. I ran through the mistand I ran but I couldnt find it.

Find what, honey?

I dont know. I wish I did know.

Is it your old dream?

Oh, yes!

He gently placed her on the bed, fumbled in the darkness and lit a candle. In the light his facewith bloodshot eyes and harsh lines was as unreadable as stone. His shirt, opened to the waist,showed a brown chest covered with thick black hair. Scarlett, still shaking with fright, thought howstrong and unyielding that chest was, and she whispered: Hold me, Rhett.

Darling! he said swiftly, and picking her up he sat down in a large chair, cradling her bodyagainst him.

Oh, Rhett, its awful to be hungry.

It must be awful to dream of starvation after a seven-course dinner including that enormouscrawfish. He smiled but his eyes were kind.

Oh, Rhett, I just run and run and hunt and I cant ever find what it is Im hunting for. Itsalways hidden in the mist. I know if I could find it, Id be safe forever and ever and never be coldor hungry again.

Is it a person or a thing youre hunting?

I dont know. I never thought about it. Rhett, do you think Ill ever dream that I get there tosafety?

No, he said, smoothing her tumbled hair, I dont. Dreams arent like that. But I do think thatif you get used to being safe and warm and well fed in your everyday life, youll stop dreamingthat dream. And, Scarlett, Im going to see that you are safe.

Rhett, you are so nice.

Thanks for the crumbs from your table, Mrs. Dives. Scarlett, I want you to say to yourselfevery morning when you wake up: I cant ever be hungry again and nothing can ever touch me solong as Rhett is here and the United States government holds out.

The United States government? she questioned, sitting up, startled, tears still on her cheeks.

The ex-Confederate money has now become an honest woman. I invested most of it in government bonds.

Gods nightgown! cried Scarlett, sitting up in his lap, forgetful of her recent terror. Do youmean to tell me youve loaned your money to the Yankees?

At a fair per cent.

I dont care if its a hundred percent! You must sell them immediately. The idea of letting theYankees have the use of your money!

And what must I do with it? he questioned with a smile, noting that her eyes were no longerwide with fright.

Whywhy buy property at Five Points. Ill bet you could buy all of Five Points with themoney you have.

Thank you, but I wouldnt have Five Points. Now that the Carpetbagger government has reallygotten control of Georgia, theres no telling what may happen, I wouldnt put anything beyond theswarm of buzzards thats swooping down on Georgia now from north, east, south and west. Implaying along with them, you understand, as a good Scalawag should do, but I dont trust them.

And Im not putting my money in real estate. I prefer bonds. You can hide them. You cant hidereal estate very easily.

Do you think she began, paling as she thought of the mills and store.

I dont know. But dont look so frightened, Scarlett. Our charming new governor is a goodfriend of mine. Its just that times are too uncertain now and I dont want much of my money tiedup in real estate.

He shifted her to one knee and, leaning back, reached for a cigar and lit it. She sat with her barefeet dangling, watching the play of muscles on his brown chest, her terrors forgotten.

And while we are on the subject of real estate, Scarlett, he said, I am going to build a house.

You might have bullied Frank into living in Miss Pittys house, but not me. I dont believe I couldbear her vaporings three times a day and, moreover, I believe Uncle Peter would assassinate mebefore he would let me live under the sacred Hamilton roof. Miss Pitty can get Miss India Wilkesto stay with her and keep the bogyman away. When we get back to Atlanta we are going to stay inthe bridal suite of the National Hotel until our house is finished. Before we left Atlanta I wasdickering for that big lot on Peachtree, the one near the Leyden house. You know the one I mean?

Oh, Rhett, how lovely! I do so want a house of my own. A great big one!

Then at last we are agreed on something. What about a white stucco with wrought-iron worklike these Creole houses here?

Oh, no, Rhett. Not anything old fashioned like these New Orleans houses. I know just what Iwant. Its the newest thing because I saw a picture of it inlet me seeit was in that HarpersWeekly I was looking at. It was modeled after a Swiss chalet.

A Swiss what?

A chalet.

Spell it.

She complied.

Oh, he said and stroked his mustache.

It was lovely. It had a high mansard roof with a picket fence on top and a tower made of fancyshingles at each end. And the towers had windows with red and blue glass in them. It was sostylish looking.

I suppose it had jigsaw work on the porch banisters?

Yes.

And a fringe of wooden scrollwork hanging from the roof of the porch?

Yes. You must have seen one like it.

I havebut not in Switzerland. The Swiss are a very intelligent race and keenly alive toarchitectural beauty. Do you really want a house like that?

Oh, yes!

I had hoped that association with me might Improve your taste. Why not a Creole house or aColonial with six white columns?

I tell you I dont want anything tacky and old-fashioned looking. And inside lets have red wallpaper and red velvet portieres over all the folding doors and oh, lots of expensive walnut furnitureand grand thick carpets andoh, Rhett, everybody will be pea green when they see our house!

It is very necessary that everyone shall be envious? Well, if you like they shall be green. ButScarlett, has it occurred to you that its hardly in good taste to furnish the house on so lavish a scalewhen everyone is so poor?

I want it that way, she said obstinately. I want to make everybody whos been mean to mefeel bad. And well give big receptions thatll make the whole town wish they hadnt said suchnasty things.

But who will come to our receptions?

Why, everybody, of course.

I doubt it. The Old Guard dies but it never surrenders.

Oh, Rhett, how you run on! If youve got money, people always like you.

Not Southerners. Its harder for speculators money to get into the best parlors than for thecamel to go through the needles eye. And as for Scalawagsthats you and me, my petwell belucky if we arent spit upon. But if youd like to try, Ill back you, my dear, and Im sure I shallenjoy your campaign intensely. And while we are on the subject of money, let me make this clearto you. You can have all the cash you want for the house and all you want for your fal-lals. And ifyou like jewelry, you can have it but Im going to pick it out. You have such execrable taste, mypet. And anything you want for Wade or Ella. And if Will Benteen cant make a go of the cotton,Im willing to chip in and help out on that white elephant in Clayton County that you love somuch. Thats fair enough, isnt it?

Of course. Youre very generous.

But listen closely. Not one cent for the store and not one cent for that kindling factory ofyours.

Oh, said Scarlett, her face falling. All during the honeymoon she had been thinking how shecould bring up the subject of the thousand dollars she needed to buy fifty feet more of land toenlarge her lumber yard.

I thought you always bragged about being broad minded and not caring what people said aboutmy running a business, and youre just like every other manso afraid people will say I wear thepants in the family.

Theres never going to be any doubt in anybodys mind about who wears the pants in the Butlerfamily, drawled Rhett. I dont care what fools say. In fact, Im ill bred enough to be proud ofhaving a smart wife. I want you to keep on running the store and the mills. They are yourchildrens. When Wade grows up he wont feel right about being supported by his stepfather, andthen he can take over the management. But not one cent of mine goes into either business.

Why?

Because I dont care to contribute to the support of Ashley Wilkes.

Are you going to begin that again?

No. But you asked my reasons and I have given them. And another thing. Dont think you canjuggle books on me and lie about how much your clothes cost and how much it takes to run thehouse, so that you can use the money to buy more mules or another mill for Ashley. I intend tolook over and carefully check your expenditures and I know what things cost. Oh, dont getinsulted. Youd do it. I wouldnt put it beyond you. In fact, I wouldnt put anything beyond youwhere either Tara or Ashley is concerned. I dont mind Tara. But I must draw the line at Ashley.

Im riding you with a slack rein, my pet, but dont forget that Im riding with curb and spurs justthe same.

Chapter 49

MRS. ELSING cocked her ear toward the hall. Hearing Melanies steps die away into the kitchenwhere rattling dishes and clinking silverware gave promise of refreshments, she turned and spokesoftly to the ladies who sat in a circle in the parlor, their sewing baskets in their laps.

Personally, I do not intend to call on Scarlett now or ever, she said, the chill elegance of herface colder than usual.

The other members of the Ladies Sewing Circle for the Widows and Orphans of theConfederacy eagerly laid down their needles and edged their rocking chairs closer. All the ladieshad been bursting to discuss Scarlett and Rhett but Melanies presence prevented it. Just the daybefore, the couple had returned from New Orleans and they were occupying the bridal suite at theNational Hotel.

Hugh says that I must call out of courtesy for the way Captain Butler saved his life, Mrs. Elsing continued. And poor Fanny sides with him and says she will call too. I said to her Fanny,

I said, if it wasnt for Scarlett, Tommy would be alive this minute. It is an insult to his memory tocall. And Fanny had no better sense than to say Mother, Im not calling on Scarlett. Im calling onCaptain Butler. He tried his best to save Tommy and it wasnt his fault if he failed.

How silly young people are! said Mrs. Merriwether. Call, indeed! Her stout bosom swelledindignantly as she remembered Scarletts rude reception of her advice on marrying Rhett. MyMaybelle is just as silly as your Fanny. She says she and Ren will call, because Captain Butlerkept Ren from getting hanged. And I said if it hadnt been for Scarlett exposing herself, Renwould never have been in any danger. And Father Merriwether intends to call and he talks like hewas in his dotage and says hes grateful to that scoundrel, even if Im not. I vow, since FatherMerriwether was in that Watling creatures house he has acted in a disgraceful way. Call, indeed! Icertainly shant call. Scarlett has outlawed herself by marrying such a man. He was bad enoughwhen he was a speculator during the war and making money out of our hunger but now that he ishand in glove with the Carpetbaggers and Scalawags and a friendactually a friend of that odiouswretch, Governor Bullock Call, indeed!

Mrs. Bonnell sighed. She was a plump brown wren of a woman with a cheerful face.

Theyll only call once, for courtesy, Dolly. I dont know that I blame them. Ive heard that allthe men who were out that night intend to call, and I think they should. Somehow, its hard for meto think that Scarlett is her mothers child. I went to school with Ellen Robillard in Savannah andthere was never a lovelier girl than she was and she was very dear to me. If only her father had notopposed her match with her cousin, Philippe Robillard! There was nothing really wrong with theboyboys must sow their wild oats. But Ellen must run off and marry old man OHara and have adaughter like Scarlett. But really, I feel that I must call once out of memory to Ellen.

Sentimental nonsense! snorted Mrs. Merriwether with vigor. Kitty Bonnell, are you going tocall on a woman who married a bare year after her husbands death? A woman

And she really killed Mr. Kennedy, interrupted India. Her voice was cool but acid. Whenevershe thought of Scarlett it was hard for her even to be polite, remembering, always rememberingStuart Tarleton. And I have always thought there was more between her and that Butler manbefore Mr. Kennedy was killed than most people suspected.

Before the ladies could recover from their shocked astonishment at her statement and at aspinster mentioning such a matter, Melanie was standing in the doorway. So engrossed had theybeen in their gossip that they had not heard her light tread and now, confronted by their hostess,they looked like whispering schoolgirls caught by a teacher. Alarm was added to consternation atthe change in Melanies face. She was pink with righteous anger, her gentle eyes snapping fire, hernostrils quivering. No one had ever seen Melanie angry before. Not a lady present thought hercapable of wrath. They all loved her but they thought her the sweetest, most pliable of youngwomen, deferential to her elders and without any opinions of her own.

How dare you, India? she questioned in a low voice that shook. Where will your jealousylead you? For shame!

Indias face went white but her head was high.

I retract nothing, she said briefly. But her mind was seething.

Jealous, am I? she thought. With the memory of Stuart Tarleton and of Honey and Charles,didnt she have good reason to be jealous of Scarlett? Didnt she have good reason to hate her,especially now that she had a suspicion that Scarlett had somehow entangled Ashley in her web?

She thought: Theres plenty I could tell you about Ashley and your precious Scarlett. India wastorn between the desire to shield Ashley by her silence and to extricate him by telling all hersuspicions to Melanie and the whole world. That would force Scarlett to release whatever hold shehad on Ashley. But this was not the time. She had nothing definite, only suspicions.

I retract nothing, she repeated.

Then it is fortunate that you are no longer living under my roof, said Melanie and her wordswere cold.

India leaped to her feet, red flooding her sallow face.

Melanie, youmy sister-in-lawyou arent going to quarrel with me over that fast piece

Scarlett is my sister-in-law, too, said Melanie, meeting Indias eyes squarely as though theywere strangers. And dearer to me than any blood sister could ever be. If you are so forgetful ofmy favors at her hands, I am not. She stayed with me through the whole siege when she could havegone home, when even Aunt Pitty had run away to Macon. She brought my baby for me when theYankees were almost in Atlanta and she burdened herself with me and Beau all that dreadful trip toTara when she could have left me here in a hospital for the Yankees to get me. And she nursed andfed me, even if she was tired and even if she went hungry. Because I was sick and weak, I had thebest mattress at Tara. When I could walk, I had the only whole pair of shoes. You can forget thosethings she did for me, India, but I cannot. And when Ashley came home, sick, discouraged, withouta home, without a cent in his pockets, she took him in like a sister. And when we thought we wouldhave to go North and it was breaking our hearts to leave Georgia, Scarlett stepped in and gave himthe mill to run. And Captain Butler saved Ashleys life out of the kindness of his heart. CertainlyAshley had no claim on him! And I am grateful, grateful to Scarlett and to Captain Butler. But you,India! How can you forget the favors Scarlett has done me and Ashley? How can you hold yourbrothers life so cheap as to cast slurs on the man who saved him? If you went down on your kneesto Captain Butler and Scarlett, it would not be enough.

Now, Melly, began Mrs. Merriwether briskly, for she had recovered her composure, thats noway to talk to India.

I heard what you said about Scarlett too, cried Melanie, swinging on the stout old lady withthe air of a duelist who, having withdrawn a blade from one prostrate opponent, turns hungrilytoward another. And you too, Mrs. Elsing. What you think of her in your own petty minds, I donot care, for that is your business. But what you say about her in my own house or in my ownhearing, ever, is my business. But how can you even think such dreadful things, much less saythem? Are your men so cheap to you that you would rather see them dead than alive? Have you nogratitude to the man who saved them and saved them at risk of his own life? The Yankees mighteasily have thought him a member of the Klan if the whole truth had come out! They might havehanged him. But he risked himself for your men. For your father-in-law, Mrs. Merriwether, and your son-in-law and your two nephews, too. And your brother, Mrs. Bonnell, and your son andson-in-law, Mrs. Elsing. Ingrates, thats what you are! I ask an apology from all of you.

Mrs. Elsing was on her feet cramming her sewing into her box, her mouth set.

If anyone had ever told me that you could be so ill bred, Melly No, I will not apologize.

India is right Scarlett is a flighty, fast bit of baggage. I cant forget how she acted during the war.

And I cant forget how poor white trashy shes acted since she got a little money

What you cant forget cut in Melanie, clenching her small fists against her sides, is that shedemoted Hugh because he wasnt smart enough to run her mill.

Melly! moaned a chorus of voices.

Mrs. Elsings head jerked up and she started toward the door. With her hand on the knob of thefront door, she stopped and turned.

Melly, she said and her voice softened, honey, this breaks my heart. I was your mothers bestfriend and I helped Dr. Meade bring you into this world and Ive loved you like you were mine. Ifit were something that mattered it wouldnt be so hard to hear you talk like this. But about awoman like Scarlett OHara whod just as soon do you a dirty turn as the next of us

Tears had started in Melanies eyes at the first words Mrs. Elsing spoke, but her face hardenedwhen the old lady had finished.

I want it understood, she said, that any of you who do not call on Scarlett need never, nevercall on me.

There was a loud murmur of voices, confusion as the ladies got to their feet Mrs. Elsing droppedher sewing box on the floor and came back into the room, her false fringe jerking awry.

I wont have it! she cried. I wont have it! You are beside yourself, Melly, and I dont holdyou responsible. You shall be my friend and I shall be yours. I refuse to let this come between us.

She was crying and somehow, Melanie was in her arms, crying too, but declaring between sobsthat she meant every word she said. Several of the other ladies burst into tears and Mrs.

Merriwether, trumpeting loudly into her handkerchief, embraced both Mrs. Elsing and Melanie.

Aunt Pitty, who had been a petrified witness to the whole scene, suddenly slid to the floor in whatwas one of the few real fainting spells she had ever had. Amid the tears and confusion and kissingand scurrying for smelling salts and brandy, there was only one calm face, one dry pair of eyes.

India Wilkes took her departure unnoticed by anyone.

Grandpa Merriwether, meeting Uncle Henry Hamilton in the Girl of the Period Saloon severalhours later, related the happenings of the morning which he had heard from Mrs. Merriwether. Hetold it was relish for he was delighted that someone had the courage to face down his redoubtabledaughter-in-law. Certainly, he had never had such courage.

Well, what did the pack of silly fools finally decide to do? asked Uncle Henry irritably.

I dunno for sure, said Grandpa, but it looks to me like Melly won hands down on this go-round. Ill bet theyll all call, at least once. Folks set a store by that niece of yours, Henry.

Mellys a fool and the ladies are right. Scarlett is a slick piece of baggage and I dont see why Charlie ever married her, said Uncle Henry gloomily. But Melly was right too, in a way. Its onlydecent that the families of the men Captain Butler saved should call. When you come right down toit, I havent got so much against Butler. He showed himself a fine man that night he saved ourhides. Its Scarlett who sticks under my tail like a cocklebur. Shes a sight too smart for her owngood. Well, Ive got to call. Scalawag or not Scarlett is my niece by marriage, after all. I wasaiming to call this afternoon.

Ill go with you, Henry. Dolly will be fit to be tied when she hears Ive gone. Wait till I get onemore drink.

No, well get a drink off Captain Butler. Ill say this for him, he always has good licker.

Rhett had said that the Old Guard would never surrender and he was right. He knew how littlesignificance there was to the few calls made upon them, and he knew why the calls were made.

The families of the men who had been in the ill-starred Klan foray did call first, but called withobvious infrequency thereafter. And they did not invite the Rhett Butlers to their homes.

Rhett said they would not have come at all, except for fear of violence at the hands of Melanie,Where he got this idea, Scarlett did not know but she dismissed it with the contempt it deserved.

For what possible influence could Melanie have on people like Mrs. Elsing and Mrs. Merriwether?

That they did not call again worried her very little; in fact, their absence was hardly noticed, forher suite was crowded with guests of another type. New people, established Atlantians calledthem, when they were not calling them something less polite.

There were many new people staying at the National Hotel who, like Rhett and Scarlett, werewaiting for their houses to be completed. They were gay, wealthy people, very much like RhettsNew Orleans friends, elegant of dress, free with their money, vague as to their antecedents. All themen were Republicans and were in Atlanta on business connected with the state government.

Just what the business was, Scarlett did not know and did not trouble to learn.

Rhett could have told her exactly what it wasthe same business that buzzards have with dyinganimals. They smelted death from afar and were drawn unerringly to it, to gorge themselves.

Government of Georgia by its own citizens was dead, the state was helpless and the adventurerswere swarming in.

The wives of Rhetts Scalawag and Carpetbagger friends called in droves and so did the newpeople she had met when she sold lumber for their homes. Rhett said that, having done businesswith them, she should receive them and, having received them, she found them pleasant company.

They lovely clothes and talked about the or hard times, but confined the conversatio(wore) ntofashions,scandalsand(never) whist.Scarletthadneve(war) r played cards before and she tookto whist with joy, becoming a good player in a short time.

Whenever she was at the hotel there was a crowd of whist players in her suite. But she was notoften in her suite these days, for she was too busy with the building of her new house to bebothered with callers. These days she did not much care whether she had callers or not. She wantedto delay her social activities until the day when the house was finished and she could emerge as themistress of Atlantas largest mansion, the hostess of the towns most elaborate entertainments.

Through the long warm days she watched her red stone and gray shingle house rise grandly, totower above any other house on Peachtree Street. Forgetful of the store and the mills, she spent hertime on the lot, arguing with carpenters, bickering with masons, harrying the contractor. As the.

walls went swiftly up she thought with satisfaction that, when finished, it would be larger and finerlooking than any other house in town. It would be even more imposing than the near-by Jamesresidence which had just been purchased for the official mansion of Governor Bullock.

The governors mansion was brave with jigsaw work on banisters and eaves, but the intricatescrollwork on Scarletts house put the mansion to shame. The mansion had a ballroom, but itlooked like a billiard table compared with the enormous room that covered the entire third floor ofScarletts house. In fact, her house had more of everything than the mansion, or any other house intown for that matter, more cupolas and turrets and towers and balconies and lightning rods and farmore windows with colored panes.

A veranda encircled the entire house, and four flights of steps on the four sides of the buildingled up to it. The yard was wide and green and scattered about it were rustic iron benches, an ironsummerhouse, fashionably called a gazebo which, Scarlett had been assured, was of pure Gothicdesign, and two large iron statues, one a stag and the other a mastiff as large as a Shetland pony. ToWade and Ella, a little dazzled by the size, splendor and fashionable dark gloom of their newhome, these two metal animals were the only cheerful notes.

Within, the house was furnished as Scarlett had desired, with thick red carpeting which ran fromwall to wall, red velvet portieres and the newest of highly varnished black-walnut furniture, carvedwherever there was an inch for carving and upholstered in such slick horsehair that ladies had todeposit themselves thereon with great care for fear of sliding off. Everywhere on the walls weregilt-framed mirrors and long pier glassesas many, Rhett said idly, there were in Belle Watlingsestablishment.Interspreadweresteelengravingsinheavyframes(as) , some of them eightfeet long, which Scarlett had ordered especially from New York. The walls were covered with richdark paper, the ceilings high and the house was always dim, for the windows were overdraped with plum-colored p(were) lush hangings that shut out most of the sunlight.

All in all it was an establishment to take ones breath away and Scarlett, stepping on the softcarpets and sinking into the embrace of the deep feather beds, remembered the cold floors and thestraw-stuffed bedticks of Tara and was satisfied. She thought it the most beautiful and mostelegantly furnished house she had ever seen, but Rhett said it was a nightmare. However, if it madeher happy, she was welcome to it.

A stranger without being told a word about us would know this house was built with ill-gottengains, he said. You know, Scarlett, money ill come by never comes to good and this house isproof of the axiom. Its just the kind of house a profiteer would build.

But Scarlett, abrim with pride and happiness and full of plans for the entertainments she wouldgive when they were thoroughly settled in the house, only pinched his ear playfully and said:

Fiddle-dee-dee! How you do run on!

She knew, by now, that Rhett loved to take her down a peg, and would spoil her fun wheneverhe could, if she lent an attentive ear to his jibes. Should she take him seriously, she would beforced to quarrel with him and she did not care to match swords, for she always came off second best. So she hardly ever listened to anything he said, and what she was forced to hear she tried toturn off as a joke. At least, she tried for a while.

During their honeymoon and for the greater part of their stay at the National Hotel, they hadlived together with amiability. But scarcely had they moved into the new house and Scarlettgathered her new friends about her, when sudden sharp quarrels sprang up between them. Theywere brief quarrels, short lived because it was impossible to keep a quarrel going with Rhett, whoremained coolly indifferent to her hot words and waited his chance to pink her in an unguardedspot. She quarreled; Rhett did not. He only stated his unequivocal opinion of herself, her actions,her house and her new friends. And some of his opinions were of such a nature that she could nolonger ignore them and treat them as jokes.

For instance when she decided to change the name of Kennedys General Store to somethingmore edifying, she asked him to think of a title that would include the word emporium. Rhettsuggested Caveat Emptorium, assuring her that it would be a title most in keeping with the typeof goods sold in the store. She thought it had an imposing sound and even went so far as to havethe sign painted, when Ashley Wilkes, embarrassed, translated the real meaning. And Rhett hadroared at her rage.

And there was the way he treated Mammy. Mammy had never yielded an inch from her standthat Rhett was a mule in horse harness. She was polite but cold to Rhett. She always called himCapn Butler, never Mist Rhett. She never even dropped a curtsy when Rhett presented herwith the red petticoat and she never wore it either. She kept Ella and Wade out of Rhetts waywhenever she could, despite the fact that Wade adored Uncle Rhett and Rhett was obviously fondof the boy. But instead of discharging Mammy or being short and stern with her, Rhett treated herwith the utmost deference, with far more courtesy than he treated any of the ladies of Scarlettsrecent acquaintance. In fact, with more courtesy than he treated Scarlett herself. He always askedMammys permission, to take Wade riding and consulted with her before he bought Ella dolls. AndMammy was hardly polite to him.

Scarlett felt that Rhett should be firm with Mammy, as became the head of the house, but Rhettonly laughed and said that Mammy was the real head of the house.

He infuriated Scarlett by saying coolly that he was preparing to be very sorry for her some yearshence, when the Republican rule was gone from Georgia and the Democrats back in power.

When the Democrats get a governor and a legislature of their own, all your new vulgarRepublican friends will be wiped off the chess board and sent back to minding bars and emptyingslops where they belong. And youll be left out on the end of a limb, with never a Democraticfriend or a Republican either. Well, take no thought of the morrow.

Scarlett laughed, and with some justice, for at that time, Bullock was safe in the governorschair, twenty-seven negroes were in the legislature and thousands of the Democratic voters ofGeorgia were disfranchised.

The Democrats will never get back. All they do is make Yankees madder and put off the daywhen they could get back. All they do is talk big and run around at night Ku Kluxing.

They will get back. I know Southerners. I know Georgians. They are a tough and bullheaded lot. If theyve got to fight another war to get back, theyll fight another war. If theyve got to buyblack votes like the Yankees have done, then they will buy black votes. If theyve got to vote tenthousand dead men like the Yankees did, every corpse in every cemetery in Georgia will be at thepolls. Things are going to get so bad under the benign rule of our good friend Rufus Bullock thatGeorgia is going to vomit him up.

Rhett, dont use such vulgar words! cried Scarlett. You talk like I wouldnt be glad to see theDemocrats come back! And you know that isnt so! Id be very glad to see them back. Do youthink I like to see these soldiers hanging around, reminding me ofdo you think I like why, Ima Georgian, too! Id like to see the Democrats get back. But they wont. Not ever. And even if theydid, how would that affect my friends? Theyd still have their money, wouldnt they?

If they kept their money. But I doubt the ability of any of them to keep money more than fiveyears at the rate theyre spending. Easy come, easy go. Their money wont do them any good. Anymore than my money has done you any good. It certainly hasnt made a horse out of you yet, hasit, my pretty mule?

The quarrel which sprang from this last remark lasted for days. After the fourth day of Scarlettssulks and obvious silent demands for an apology, Rhett went to New Orleans, taking Wade withhim, over Mammys protests, and he stayed away until Scarletts tantrum had passed. But the stingof not humbling him remained with her.

When he came back from New Orleans, cool and bland, she swallowed her anger as best shecould, pushing it into the back of her mind to be thought of at some later date. She did not want tobother with anything unpleasant now. She wanted to be happy for her mind was full of the firstparty she would give in the new house. It would be an enormous night reception with palms and anorchestra and all the porches shrouded in canvas, and a collation that made her mouth water inanticipation. To it she intended to invite everyone she had ever known in Atlanta, all the old friendsand all the new and charming ones she had met since returning from her honeymoon. Theexcitement of the party banished, for the most part, the memory of Rhetts barbs and she washappy, happier than she had been in years as she planned her reception.

Oh, what fun it was to be rich! To give parties and never count the cost! To buy the mostexpensive furniture and dresses and food and never think about the bills! How marvelous to beable to send tidy checks to Aunt Pauline and Aunt Eulalie in Charleston, and to Will at Tara! Oh,the jealous fools who said money wasnt everything! How perverse of Rhett to say that it had donenothing for her!

Scarlett issued cards of invitation to all her friends and acquaintances, old and new, even thoseshe did not like. She did not except even Mrs. Merriwether who had been almost rude when shecalled on her at the National Hotel or Mrs. Elsing who had been cool to frigidness. She invitedMrs. Meade and Mrs. Whiting who she knew disliked her and who she knew would beembarrassed because they did not have the proper clothes to wear to so elegant a function. ForScarletts housewarming, or crush, as it was fashionable to call such evening parties, half-reception, half-ball, was by far the most elaborate affair Atlanta had ever seen.

That night the house and canvas-covered veranda were filled with guests who drank herchampagne punch and ate her patties and creamed oysters and danced to the music of the orchestrathat was carefully screened by a wall of palms and rubber plants. But none of those whom Rhetthad termed the Old Guard were present except Melanie and Ashley, Aunt Pitty and Uncle Henry,Dr. and Mrs. Meade and Grandpa Merriwether.

Many of the Old Guard had reluctantly decided to attend the crush. Some had acceptedbecause of Melanies attitude, others because they felt they owed Rhett a debt for saving their livesand those of their relatives. But, two days before the function, a rumor went about Atlanta thatGovernor Bullock had been invited. The Old Guard signified their disapproval by a sheaf of cards,regretting their inability to accept Scarletts kind invitation. And the small group of old friends whodid attend took their departure, embarrassed but firm, as soon as the governor entered Scarlettshouse.

Scarlett was so bewildered and infuriated at these slights that the party was utterly ruined forher. Her elegant crush! She had planned it so lovingly and so few old friends and no old enemieshad been there to see how wonderful it was! After the last guest had gone home at dawn, shewould have cried and stormed had she not been afraid that Rhett would roar with laughter, afraidthat she would read I told you so in his dancing black eyes, even if he did not speak the words.

So she swallowed her wrath with poor grace and pretended indifference.

Only to Melanie, the next morning, did she permit herself the luxury of exploding.

You insulted me, Melly Wilkes, and you made Ashley and the others insult me! You knowtheyd have never gone home so soon if you hadnt dragged them. Oh, I saw you! Just when Istarted to bring Governor Bullock over to present him to you, you ran like a rabbit!

I did not believeI could not believe that he would really be present, answered Melanieunhappily. Even though everybody said

Everybody? So everybodys been clacking and blabbing about me, have they? cried Scarlettfuriously. Do you mean to tell me if youd known the governor was going to be present, youwouldnt have come either?

No, said Melanie in a low voice, her eyes on the floor. Darling, I just wouldnt have come.

Great balls of fire! So youd have insulted me like everybody else did!

Oh, mercy! cried Melly, in real distress. I didnt mean to hurt you. Youre my own sister,darling, my own Charlies widow and I

She put a timid hand on Scarletts arm. But Scarlett flung it off, wishing fervently that she couldroar as loudly as Gerald used to roar when in a temper. But Melanie faced her wrath. And as shelooked into Scarletts stormy green eyes, her slight shoulders straightened and a mantle of dignity,strangely at variance with her childish face and figure, fell upon her.

Im sorry youre hurt, my dear, but I cannot meet Governor Bullock or any Republican or anyScalawag. I will not meet them, in your house or any other house. No, not even if I have toif Ihave to Melanie cast about her for the worst thing she could think ofNot even if I have to berude.

Are you criticizing my friends?

No, dear. But they are your friends and not mine.

Are you criticizing me for having the governor at my house?

Cornered, Melanie still met Scarletts eyes unwaveringly.

Darling, what you do, you always do for a good reason and I love you and trust you and it isnot for me to criticize. And I will not permit anyone to criticize you in my hearing. But, oh,Scarlett! Suddenly words began to bubble out, swift hot words and there was inflexible hate in thelow voice. Can you forget what these people did to us? Can you forget darling Charlie dead andAshleys health ruined and Twelve Oaks burned? Oh, Scarlett, you cant forget that terrible manyou shot with your mothers sewing box in his hands! You cant forget Shermans men at Tara andhow they even stole our underwear! And tried to burn the place down and actually handled myfathers sword! Oh, Scarlett, it was these same people who robbed us and tortured us and left us tostarve that you invited to your party! The same people who have set the darkies up to lord it overus, who are robbing us and keeping out men from voting! I cant forget. I wont forget. I wont letmy Beau forget and Ill teach my grandchildren to hate these peopleand my grandchildrensgrandchildren if God lets me live that long! Scarlett, how can you forget?

Melanie paused for breath and Scarlett stared at her, startled out of her own anger by thequivering note of violence in Melanies voice.

Do you think Im a fool? she questioned impatiently. Of course, I remember! But all thatspast, Melly. Its up to us to make the best of things and Im trying to do it. Governor Bullock andsome of the nicer Republicans can help us a lot if we handle them right.

There are no nice Republicans, said Melanie flatly. And I dont want their help. And I dontintend to make the best of thingsif they are Yankee things.

Good Heaven, Melly, why get in such a pet?

Oh! cried Melanie, looking conscience stricken. How I have run on! Scarlett I didnt mean tohurt your feelings or to criticize. Everybody thinks differently and everybodys got a right to theirown opinion. Now, dear, I love you and you know I love you and nothing you could ever do wouldmake me change. And you still love me, dont you? I havent made you hate me, have I? Scarlett, Icouldnt stand it if anything ever came between usafter all weve been through together! Say itsall right.

Fiddle-dee-dee, Melly, what a tempest you make in a teapot, said Scarlett grudgingly, but shedid not throw off the hand that stole around her waist.

Now, were all right again, said Melanie pleasedly but she added softly, I want us to visiteach other just like we always did, darling. Just you let me know what days Republicans andScalawags are coming to see you and Ill stay at home on those days.

Its a matter of supreme indifference to me whether you come or not, said Scarlett, putting onher bonnet and going home in a huff. There was some satisfaction to her wounded vanity in thehurt look on Melanies face.

In the weeks that followed her first party, Scarlett was hard put to keep up her pretense ofsupreme indifference to public opinion. When she did not receive calls from old friends, exceptMelanie and Pitty and Uncle Henry and Ashley, and did not get cards to their modest entertainments,she was genuinely puzzled and hurt. Had she not gone out of her way to bury old hatchetsand show these people that she bore them no ill will for their gossiping and backbiting? Surelythey must know that she didnt like Governor Bullock any more than they did but that it wasexpedient to be nice to him. The idiots! If everybody would be nice to the Republicans, Georgiawould get out of the fix she was in very quickly.

She did not realize then that with one stroke she had cut forever any fragile tie that still boundher to the old days, to old friends. Not even Melanies influence could repair the break of thatgossamer thread. And Melanie, bewildered, broken hearted but still loyal, did not try to repair it.

Even had Scarlett wanted to turn back to old ways, old friends, there was no turning back possiblenow. The face of the town was set against her as stonily as granite. The hate that enveloped theBullock regime enveloped her too, a hate that had little fire and fury in it but much coldimplacability. Scarlett had cast her lot with the enemy and, whatever her birth and familyconnections, she was now in the category of a turncoat, a nigger lover, a traitor, a Republicananda Scalawag.

After a miserable while, Scarletts pretended indifference gave way to the real thing. She hadnever been one to worry long over the vagaries of human conduct or to be cast down for long ifone line of action failed. Soon she did not care what the Merriwethers, the Elsings, the Whitings,the Bonnells, the Meades and others thought of her. At least, Melanie called, bringing Ashley, andAshley was the one who mattered the most. And there were other people in Atlanta who wouldcome to her parties, other people far more congenial than those hide-bound old hens. Any time shewanted to fill her house with guests, she could do so and these guests would be far more entertaining,far more handsomely dressed than those prissy, strait-laced old fools who disapproved of her.

These people were newcomers to Atlanta. Some of them were acquaintances of Rhett, someassociated with him in those mysterious affairs which he referred to as mere business, my pet.

Some were couples Scarlett had met when she was living at the National Hotel and some wereGovernor Bullocks appointees.

The set with which she was now moving was a motley crew. Among them were the Gelerts whohad lived in a dozen different states and who apparently had left each one hastily upon detection oftheir swindling schemes; the Conningtons whose connection with the Freedmens Bureau in adistant state had been highly lucrative at the expense of the ignorant blacks they were supposed toprotect; the Deals who had sold cardboard shoes to the Confederate government until it becamenecessary for them to spend the last year of the war in Europe; the Hundons who had policerecords in many cities but nevertheless were often successful bidders on state contracts; theCarahans who had gotten their start in a gambling house and now were gambling for bigger stakesin the building of nonexistent railroads with the states money; the Flahertys who had bought saltat one cent a pound in 1861 and made a fortune when salt went to fifty cents in 1863, and the Bartswho had owned the largest brothel in a Northern metropolis during the war and now were movingin the best circles of Carpetbagger society.

Such people were Scarletts intimates now, but those who attended her larger receptions included others of some culture and refinement, many of excellent families. In addition to theCarpetbag gentry, substantial people from the North were moving into Atlanta, attracted by thenever ceasing business activity of the town in this period of rebuilding and expansion. Yankeefamilies of wealth sent young sons to the South to pioneer on the new frontier, and Yankee officersafter their discharge took up permanent residence in the town they had fought so hard to capture.

At first, strangers in strange town, they were glad to accept invitations to the lavishentertainmentsof the wea(a) lthy and hospitable Mrs. Butler, but they soon drifted out of her set. Theywere good people and they needed only a short acquaintance with Carpetbaggers and Carpetbagrule to become as resentful of them as the native Georgians were. Many became Democrats andmore Southern than the Southerners.

Other misfits in Scarletts circle remained there only be-cause they were not welcomeelsewhere. They would have much preferred the quiet parlors of the Old Guard, but the Old Guardwould have none of them. Among these were the Yankee schoolmarms who had come South imbuedwith the desire to uplift the Negro and the Scalawags who had been born good Democrats buthad turned Republican after the surrender.

It was hard to say which class was more cordially hated by the settled citizenry, the impracticalYankee schoolmarms or the Scalawags, but the balance probably fell with the latter, Theschoolmarms could be dismissed with, Well, what can you expect of nigger-loving Yankees? Ofcourse they think the nigger is just as good as they are! But for those Georgians who had turnedRepublican for personal gain, there was no excuse.

Starving is good enough for us. It ought to be good enough for you, was the way the OldGuard felt. Many ex-Confederate soldiers, knowing the frantic fear of men who saw their familiesin want, were more tolerant of former comrades who had changed political colors in order thattheir families might eat. But not the women of the Old Guard, and the women were the implacableand inflexible power behind the social throne. The Lost Cause was stronger, dearer now in theirhearts than it had ever been at the height of its glory. It was a fetish now. Everything about it wassacred, the graves of the men who had died for it, the battle fields, the torn flags, the crossed sabresin their halls, the fading letters from the front, the veterans. These women gave no aid, comfort orquarter to the late enemy, and now Scarlett was numbered among the enemy.

In this mongrel society thrown together by the exigencies of the political situation, there was butone thing in common. That was money. As most of them had never had twenty-five dollars at onetime in their whole lives, previous to the war, they were now embarked on an orgy of spendingsuch as Atlanta had never seen before.

With the Republicans in the political saddle the town entered into era of waste and ostentation,withthetrappingsofrefinementthinlyveneeringtheviceand(an) vulgarity beneath.

Never before had the cleavage of the very rich and the very poor been so marked. Those on toptook no thought for those less fortunate. Except for the negroes, of course. They must have thevery best. The best of schools and lodgings and clothes and amusements, for they were the powerin politics and every negro vote counted. But as for the recently impoverished Atlanta people, theycould starve and drop in the streets for all the newly rich Republicans cared.

On the crest of this wave of vulgarity, Scarlett rode triumphantly, newly a bride, dashingly pretty in her fine clothes, with Rhetts money solidly behind her. It was an era that suited her, crude,garish, showy, full of overdressed women, overfurnished houses, too many jewels, too manyhorses, too much food, too much whisky. When Scarlett infrequently stopped to think about thematter she knew that none of her new associates could be called ladies by Ellens strict standards.

But she had broken with Ellens standards too many times since that far-away day when she stoodin the parlor at Tara and decided to be Rhetts mistress, and she did not often feel the bite of consciencenow.

Perhaps these new friends were not, strictly speaking, ladies and gentlemen but like Rhetts NewOrleans friends, they were so much fun! So very much more fun than the subdued, churchgoing,Shakespeare-reading friends of her earlier Atlanta days. And, except for her brief honeymooninterlude, she had not had fun in so long. Nor had she had any sense of security. Now secure, shewanted to dance, to play, to riot, to gorge on foods and fine wine, to deck herself in silks andsatins, to wallow on soft feather beds and fine upholstery. And she did all these things. Encouragedby Rhetts amused tolerance, freed now from the restraints of her childhood, freed even from thatlast fear of poverty, she was permitting herself the luxury she had often dreamedof doing exactlywhat she pleased and telling people who didnt like it to go to hell.

To her had come that pleasant intoxication peculiar to those whose lives are a deliberate slap inthe face of organized societythe gambler, the confidence man, the polite adventuress, an thosewho succeed by their wits. She said and did exactly what she pleased and, in practically no time,her insolence knew no bounds.

She did not hesitate to display arrogance to her new Republican and Scalawag friends but to noclass was she ruder or more insolent than the Yankee officers of the garrison and their families. Ofall the heterogeneous mass of people who had poured into Atlanta, the army people alone sherefused to receive or tolerate. She even went out of her way to be bad mannered to them. Melaniewas not alone in being unable to forget what a blue uniform meant. To Scarlett, that uniform andthose gold buttons would always mean the fears of the siege, the terror of flight, the looting andburning, the desperate poverty and the grinding work at Tara. Now that she was rich and secure inthe friendship of the governor and many prominent Republicans, she could be insulting to everyblue uniform she saw. And she was insulting.

Rhett once lazily pointed out to her that most of the male guests who assembled under their roofhad worn that same blue uniform not so long ago, but she retorted that a Yankee didnt seem like aYankee unless he had on a blue uniform. To which Rhett replied: Consistency, thou art a jewel,

and shrugged.

Scarlett, hating the bright hard blue they wore, enjoyed snubbing them all the more because it sobewildered them. The garrison families had a right to be bewildered for most of them were quiet,well-bred folk, lonely in a hostile land, anxious to go home to the North, a little ashamed of theriffraff whose rule they were forced to upholdan infinitely better class than that of Scarlettsassociates. Naturally, the officers wives were puzzled that the dashing Mrs. Butler took to herbosom such women as the common red-haired Bridget Flaherty and went out of her way to slightthem.

But even the ladies whom Scarlett took to her bosom had to endure much from her. However, they did it gladly. To them, she not only represented wealth and elegance but the old regime, withits old names, old families, old traditions with which they wished ardently to identify themselves.

The old families they yearned after might have cast Scarlett out but the ladies of the newaristocracy did not know it. They only knew that Scarletts father had been a great slave owner, hermother a Robillard of Savannah and her husband was Rhett Butler of Charleston. And this wasenough for them. She was their opening wedge into the old society they wished to enter, the societywhich scorned them, would not return calls and bowed frigidly in churches. In fact, she wasmore than their wedge into society. To them, fresh from obscure beginnings, she was society.

Pinchbeck ladies themselves, they no more saw through Scarletts pinchbeck pretensions than sheherself did. They took her at her own valuation and endured much at her hands, her airs, hergraces, her tempers, her arrogance, her downright rudeness and her frankness about theirshortcomings.

They were so lately come from nothing and so uncertain of themselves they were doublyanxious to appear refined and feared to show their temper or make retorts in kind, lest they beconsidered unladylike. At all costs they must be ladies. They pretended to great delicacy, modestyand innocence. To hear them talk one would have thought they had no legs, natural functions orknowledge of the wicked world. No one would have thought that red-haired Bridget Flaherty, whohad a sun-defying white skin and a brogue that could be cut with a butter knife, had stolen herfathers hidden hoard to come to America to be chambermaid in a New York hotel. And to observethe delicate vapors of Sylvia (formerly Sadie Belle) Connington and Mamie Bart, no one wouldhave suspected that the first grew up above her fathers saloon in the Bowery and waited on the barat rush times, and that the latter, so it was said, had come out of one of her husbands own brothels.

No, they were delicate sheltered creatures now.

The men, though they had made money, learned new ways less easily or were, perhaps, lesspatient with the demands of the new gentility. They drank heavily at Scarletts parties, far tooheavily, and usually after a reception there were one or more unexpected guests who stayed thenight. They did not drink like the men of Scarletts girlhood. They became sodden, stupid, ugly orobscene. Moreover, no matter how many spittoons she might put out in view, the rugs alwaysshowed signs of tobacco juice on the mornings after.

She had a contempt for these people but she enjoyed them. Because she enjoyed them, she filledthe house with them. And because of her contempt, she told them to go to hell as often as theyannoyed her. But they stood it.

They even stood Rhett, a more difficult matter, for Rhett saw through them and they knew it. Hehad no hesitation about stripping them verbally, even under his own roof, always in a manner thatleft them no reply. Unashamed of how he came by his fortune, he pretended that they, too, wereunashamed of their beginnings and he seldom missed an opportunity to remark upon matterswhich, by common consent, everyone felt were better left in polite obscurity.

There was never any knowing when be would remark affably, over a punch cup: Ralph, if Idhad any sense Id have made my money selling gold-mine stocks to widows and orphans, like you,instead of blockading. Its so much safer. Well, Bill, I see you have a new span of horses. Beenselling a few thousand more bonds for nonexistent railroads? Good work, boy! Congratulations,Amos, on landing that state contract. Too bad you had to grease so many palms to get it.

The ladies felt that he was odiously, unendurably vulgar. The men said, behind his back, that hewas a swine and a bastard. New Atlanta liked Rhett no better than old Atlanta had done and hemade as little attempt to conciliate the one as he had the other. He went his way, amused,contemptuous, impervious to the opinions of those about him, so courteous that his courtesy wasan affront in itself. To Scarlett, he was still an enigma but an enigma about which she no longerbothered her head. She was convinced that nothing ever pleased him or ever would please him thathe either wanted something badly and didnt have it, or never had wanted anything and so didntcare about anything. He laughed at everything she did, encouraged her extravagances andinsolences, jeered at her pretensesand paid the bills.

Chapter 50

RHETT NEVER DEVIATED from his smooth, imperturbable manners, even in their mostintimate moments. But Scarlett never lost the old feeling that he was watching her covertly, knewthat if she turned her head suddenly she would surprise in his eyes that speculative, waiting look,that look of almost terrible patience that she did not understand.

Sometimes, he was a very comfortable person to live with, for all his unfortunate habit of notpermitting anyone in his presence to act a lie, palm off a pretense or indulge in bombast. Helistened to her talk of the store and the mills and the saloon, the convicts and the cost of feedingthem, and gave shrewd hard-headed advice. He had untiring energy for the dancing and parties sheloved and an unending supply of coarse stories with which he regaled her on their infrequentevenings alone when the table was cleared and brandy and coffee before them. She found that hewould give her anything she desired, answer any question she asked as long as she was forthright,and refuse her anything she attempted to gain by indirection, hints and feminine angling. He had adisconcerting habit of seeing through her and laughing rudely.

Contemplating the suave indifference with which he generally treated her, Scarlett frequentlywondered, but with no real curiosity, why he had married her. Men married for love or a home andchildren or money but she knew he had married her for none of these things. He certainly did notlove her. He referred to her lovely house as an architectural horror and said he would rather live ina well-regulated hotel than a home. And he never once hinted about children as Charles and Frankhad done. Once when trying to coquet with him she asked why he married her and was infuriatedwhen he replied with an amused gleam in his eyes: I married you to keep you for a pet, my dear.

No, he hadnt married her for any of the usual reasons men marry women. He had married hersolely because he wanted her and couldnt get her any other way. He had admitted as much thenight he proposed to her. He had wanted her, just as he had wanted Belle Watling. This was not apleasant thought In fact it was a barefaced insult. But she shrugged it off as she had learned toshrug off all unpleasant facts. They had made a bargain and she was quite pleased with her side ofthe bargain. She hoped he was equally pleased but she did not care very much whether he was ornot.

But one afternoon when she was consulting Dr. Meade about a digestive upset, she learned anunpleasant fact which she could not shrug off. It was with real hate in her eyes that she stormedinto her bedroom at twilight and told Rhett that she was going to have a baby.

He was lounging in a silk dressing gown in a cloud of smoke and his eyes went sharply to herface as she spoke. But he said nothing. He watched her in silence but there was a tenseness abouthis pose, as he waited for her next words, that was lost on her. Indignation and despair had claimedher to the exclusion of all other thoughts.

You know I dont want any more children! I never wanted any at all. Every time things aregoing right with me I have to have a baby. Oh, dont sit there and laugh! You dont want it either.

Oh, Mother of God!

If he was waiting for words from her, these were not the words he wanted. His face hardenedslightly and his eyes became blank.

Well, why not give it to Miss Melly? Didnt you tell me she was so misguided as to wantanother baby?

Oh, I could kill you! I wont have it, I tell you, I wont!

No? Pray continue.

Oh, there are things to do. Im not the stupid country fool I used to be. Now, I know that awoman doesnt have to have children if she doesnt want them! There are things

He was on his feet and had her by the wrist and there was a hard, driving fear in his face.

Scarlett, you fool, tell me the truth! You havent done anything?

No, I havent, but Im going to. Do you think Im going to have my figure ruined all overagain, just when Ive gotten my waist line down and am having a good time.

Where did you get this idea? Whos been telling you things?

Mamie Bartshe

The madam of a whore house would know such tricks. That woman never puts foot in this houseagain, do you understand? After all, it is my house and Im the master of it. I do not even want youto speak to her again.

Ill do as I please. Turn me loose. Why should you care?

I dont care whether you have one child or twenty, but I do care if you die.

Die? Me?

Yes, die. I dont suppose Mamie Bart told you the chances a woman takes when she does athing like that?

No, said Scarlett reluctantly. She just said it would fix things up fine.

By God, I will kill her! cried Rhett and his face was black with rage. He looked down intoScarletts tear-stained face and some of the wrath faded but it was still hard and set. Suddenly hepicked her up in his arms and sat down in the chair, holding her close to him, tightly, as if he fearedshe would get away from him.

Listen, my baby, I wont have you take your life in your hands. Do you hear? Good God, Idont want children any more than you do, but I can support them. I dont want to hear any more foolishness out of you, and if you dare try toScarlett, I saw a girl die that way once. She wasonly awell, but she was a pretty sort at that. Its not an easy way to die. I

Why, Rhett! she cried, startled out of her misery at the emotion in his voice. She had neverseen him so moved. Wherewho

In New Orleansoh, years ago. I was young and impressionable. He bent his head suddenlyand buried his lips in her hair. Youll have your baby, Scarlett, if I have to handcuff you to mywrist for the next nine months.

She sat up in his lap and stared into his face with frank curiosity. Under her gaze it was suddenlysmooth and bland as though wiped clear by magic. His eyebrows were up and the corner of hismouth was down.

Do I mean so much to you? she questioned, dropping her eyelids.

He gave her a level look as though estimating how much coquetry was behind the question.

Reading the true meaning of her demeanor, he made casual answer.

Well, yes. You see, Ive invested a good deal of money in you, and Id hate to lose it.

.

Melanie came out of Scarletts room, weary from the strain but happy to tears at the birth ofScarletts daughter. Rhett stood tensely in the hall, surrounded by cigar butts which had burnedholes in the fine carpetYou can go in now, Captain Butler, she said shyly.

Rhett went swiftly past her into the room and Melanie had a brief glimpse of him bending overthe small naked baby in Mammys lap before Dr. Meade shut the door. Melanie sank into a chair,her face pinkening with embarrassment that she had unintentionally witnessed so intimate a scene.

Ah! she thought How sweet! How worried poor Captain Butler has been! And he did not takea single drink all this time! How nice of him. So many gentlemen are so intoxicated by the timetheir babies are born. I fear he needs a drink badly. Dare I suggest it? No, that would be veryforward of me.

She sank gratefully into a chair, her back, which always ached these days, feeling as though itwould break in two at the waist line. Oh, how fortunate Scarlett was to have Captain Butler justoutside her door while the baby was being born! If only she had had Ashley with her that dreadfulday Beau came she would not have suffered half so much. If only that small girl behind thoseclosed doors were hers and not Scarletts! Oh, how wicked I am, she thought guiltily. I amcoveting her baby and Scarlett has been so good to me. Forgive me, Lord. I wouldnt really wantScarletts baby butbut I would so like a baby of my own!

She pushed a small cushion behind her aching back and thought hungrily of a daughter of herown. But Dr. Meade had never changed his opinion on that subject. And though she was quitewilling to risk her life for another child, Ashley would not hear of it. A daughter. How Ashleywould love a daughter!

A daughter! Mercy! She sat up in alarm. I never told Captain Butler it was a girl! And of coursehe was expecting a boy. Oh, how dreadful!

Melanie knew that to a woman a child of either sex was equally welcome but to a man, andespecially such a self-willed man as Captain Butler, a girl would be a blow, a reflection upon hismanhood. Oh, how thankful she was that God had permitted her only child to be a boy! She knewthat, had she been the wife of the fearsome Captain Butler, she would have thankfully died inchildbirth rather than present him with a daughter as his first-born.

But Mammy, waddling grinning from the room, set her mind at easeand at the same timemade her wonder just what kind of man Captain Butler really was.

Wen Ah wuz bathin dat chile, jes now, said Mammy, Ah kinder pologized ter Mist Rhettbout it not bein a boy. But, Lawd, Miss Melly, you know whut he say? He say, Hesh yo mouf,Mammy! Who want a boy? Boys ain no fun. Deys jes a passel of trouble. Gals is whut is fun. Ahwouldn swap disyere gal fer a bakers dozen of boys. Den he try ter snatch de chile frum me,buck nekked as she wuz an Ah slap his wrist an say Bhave yoseff, Mist Rhett! Ahll jes bidemah time tell you gits a boy, an den Ahll laff out loud to hear you holler fer joy. He grin an

shake his haid an say, Mammy, you is a fool. Boys ain no use ter nobody. Ain Ah a proof ofdat? Yasm, Miss Melly, he ack lak a gempmum bout it, finished Mammy graciously. It was notlost on Melanie that Rhetts conduct had gone far toward redeeming him in Mammys eyes.

Maybe Ah done been a mite wrong bout Mist Rhett. Dis sho is a happy day ter me, Miss Melly.

Ah done diapered three ginrations of Robillard gals, an it sho is a happy day.

Oh, yes, it is a happy day, Mammy. The happiest days are the days when babies come!

To one person in the house it was not a happy day. Scolded and for the most part ignored, WadeHampton idled miserably about the dining room. Early that morning, Mammy had waked himabruptly, dressed him hurriedly and sent him with Ella to Aunt Pittys house for breakfast. The onlyexplanation he received was that his mother was sick and the noise of his playing might upset her.

Aunt Pittys house was in an uproar, for the news of Scarletts sickness had sent the old lady to bedin a state with Cookie in attendance, and breakfast was a scant meal that Peter concocted for thechildren. As the morning wore on fear began to possess Wades soul. Suppose Mother died? Otherboys mothers had died. He had seen the hearses move away from the house and heard his smallfriends sobbing. Suppose Mother should die? Wade loved his mother very much, almost as muchas he feared her, and the thought of her being carried away in a black hearse behind black horseswith plumes on their bridles made his small chest ache so that he could hardly breathe.

When noon came and Peter was busy in the kitchen, Wade slipped out the front door and hurriedhome as fast as his short legs could carry him, fear speeding him. Uncle Rhett or Aunt Melly orMammy surely would tell him the truth. But Uncle Rhett and Aunt Melly were not to be seen andMammy and Dilcey sped up and down the back stairs with towels and basins of hot water and didnot once notice him in the front hall. From upstairs he could hear occasionally the curt tones of Dr.

Meade whenever a door opened. Once he heard his mother groan and he burst into sobbinghiccoughs. He knew she was going to die. For comfort, he made overtures to the honey-colored catwhich lay on the sunny window sill in the front hall. But Tom, full of years and irritable atdisturbances, switched his tail and spat softly.

Finally, Mammy, coming down the front stairs, her apron rumpled and spotted, her head ragawry, saw him and scowled. Mammy had always been Wades mainstay and her frown made himtremble.

You is de wustes boy Ah ever seed, she said. Ain Ah done sont you ter Miss Pittys? Gwanback dar!

Is Mother going towill she die?

You is de troublesomes chile Ah ever seed! Die? Gawdlmighty, no! Lawd, boys is a tawment.

Ah doan see why de Lawd sens boys ter folks. Now, gwan way from here.

But Wade did not go. He retreated behind the portieres in the hall, only half convinced by herwords. The remark about the troublesomeness of boys stung, for he had always tried his best to begood. Aunt Melly hurried down the stairs half an hour later, pale and tired but smiling to herself.

She looked thunderstruck when she saw his woebegone face in the shadows of the drapery.

Usually Aunt Melly had all the time in the world to give him. She never said, as Mother so oftendid: Dont bother me now. Im in a hurry or Run away, Wade. I am busy.

But this morning she said: Wade, youve been very naughty. Why didnt you stay at AuntPittys?

Is Mother going to die?

Gracious, no, Wade! Dont be a silly child, and then, relenting: Dr. Meade has just broughther a nice little baby, a sweet little sister for you to play with, and if you are real good you can seeher tonight. Now, run out and play and dont make any noise.

Wade slipped into the quiet dining room, his small and insecure world tottering. Was there noplace for a worried little seven-year-old boy on this sunshiny day when the grown-ups acted socuriously? He sat down on the window still in the alcove and nibbled a bit of the elephants earwhich grew in a box in the sun. It was so peppery that it stung his eyes to tears and he began to cry.

Mother was probably dying, nobody paid him any heed and one and all, they rushed about becauseof a new babya girl baby. Wade had little interest in babies, still less in girls. The only little girlhe knew intimately was Ella and, so far, she had done nothing to command his respect or liking.

After a long interval Dr. Meade and Uncle Rhett came down the stairs and stood talking in thehall in low voices. After the door shut behind the doctor, Uncle Rhett came swiftly into the diningroom and poured himself a large drink from the decanter before he saw Wade. Wade shrank back,expecting to be told again that he was naughty and must return to Aunt Pittys, but instead, UncleRhett smiled. Wade had never seen him smile like that or look so happy and, encouraged, heleaped from the sill and ran to him.

Youve got a sister, said Rhett, squeezing him. By God, the most beautiful baby you eversaw! Now, why are you crying?

Mother

Your mothers eating a great big dinner, chicken and rice and gravy and coffee, and weregoing to make her some ice cream in a little while and you can have two plates if you want them.

And Ill show you your sister too.

Weak with relief, Wade tried to be polite about his new sister but failed. Everyone was interestedin this girl. No one cared anything about him any more, not even Aunt Melly or Uncle Rhett.

Uncle Rhett, he began, do people like girls better than boys?

Rhett set down his glass and looked sharply into the small face and instant comprehension cameinto his eyes.

No, I cant say they do, he answered seriously, as though giving the matter due thought. Itsjust that girls are more trouble than boys and people are apt to worry more about troublesomepeople than those who arent.

Mammy just said boys were troublesome.

Well, Mammy was upset. She didnt mean it.

Uncle Rhett, wouldnt you rather have had a little boy than a little girl? questioned Wadehopefully.

No, answered Rhett swiftly and, seeing the boys face fall, he continued: Now, why should Iwant a boy when Ive already got one?

You have? cried Wade, his month falling open at this information. Where is he?

Right here, answered Rhett and, picking the child up, drew him to his knee. You are boyenough for me, son.

For a moment, the security and happiness of being wanted was so great that Wade almost criedagain. His throat worked and he ducked his head against Rhetts waistcoat.

You are my boy, arent you?

Can you bewell, two mens boy? questioned Wade, loyalty to the father he had neverknown struggling with love for the man who held him so understandingly.

Yes, said Rhett firmly. Just like you can be your mothers boy and Aunt Mellys, too.

Wade digested this statement. It made sense to him and he smiled and wriggled against Rhettsarm shyly.

You understand little boys, dont you, Uncle Rhett?

Rhetts dark face fell into its old harsh lines and his lip twisted.

Yes, he said bitterly, I understand little boys.

For a moment, fear came back to Wade, fear and a sudden sense of jealousy. Uncle Rhett wasnot thinking of him but of some one else.

You havent got any other began Wade and then Rhett set him on his feet.

Im going to have a drink and so are you, Wade, your first drink, a toast to your new sister.

You havent got any other began Wade and then seeing Rhett reach for the decanter ofclaret, the excitement at being included in this grown-up ceremony diverted him.

Oh, I cant, Uncle Rhett! I promised Aunt Melly I wouldnt drink till I graduated from the university and shes going to give me a watch, if I dont.

And Ill give you a chain for itthis one Im wearing now, if you want it, said Rhett and hewas smiling again. Aunt Mellys quite right But she was talking about spirits, not wine. You mustlearn to drink, wine like a gentleman, son, and theres no time like the present to learn.

Skillfully, he diluted the claret with water from the carafe until the liquid was barely pink andhanded the glass to Wade. At that moment, Mammy entered the dining room. She had changed toher best Sunday black and her apron and head rag were fresh and crisp. As she waddled, sheswitched herself and from her skirts came the whisper and rustle of silk. The worried look hadgone from her face and her almost toothless gums showed in a wide smile.

Burfday gif, Mist Rhett! she said.

Wade stopped with his glass at his lips. He knew Mammy had never liked his stepfather. He hadnever heard her call him anything except Capn Butler, and her conduct toward him had beendignified but cold. And here she was beaming and sidling and calling him Mist Rhett! What atopsy-turvy day!

Youd rather have rum than claret, I suppose, said Rhett, reaching into the cellaret andproducing a squat bottle. She is a beautiful baby, isnt she, Mammy?

She sho is, answered Mammy, smacking her lips as she took the glass.

Did you ever see a prettier one?

Well, suh, Miss Scarlett wuz mout nigh as pretty wen she come but not quite.

Have another glass, Mammy. And Mammy, his tone was stern but his eyes twinkled, whatsthat rustling noise I hear?

Lawd, Mist Rhett, dat ain nuthin but mah red silk petticoat! Mammy giggled and switchedtill her huge bulk shook.

Nothing but your petticoat! I dont believe it. You sound like a peck of dried leaves rubbingtogether. Let me see. Pull up your skirt.

Mist Rhett, you is bad! Yeah-O, Lawd!

Mammy gave a little shriek and retreated and from a distance of a yard, modestly elevated herdress a few inches and showed the ruffle of a red taffeta petticoat.

You took long enough about wearing it, grumbled Rhett but his black eyes laughed anddanced.

Yassuh, too long.

Then Rhett said something that Wade did not understand.

No more mule in horse harness?

Mist Rhett, Miss Scarlett wuz bad ter tell you dat! You ain holin dat again dis ole nigger?

No. Im not holding it. I just wanted to know. Have another drink, Mammy. Have the wholebottle. Drink up, Wade! Give us a toast.

To Sissy, cried Wade and gulped the liquid down. Choking he began to cough and hiccoughand the other two laughed and beat him on the back.

From the moment his daughter was born, Rhetts conduct was puzzling to all observers and heupset many settled notions about himself, notions which both the town and Scarlett were loath tosurrender. Whoever would have thought that he of all people would be so shamelessly, so openlyproud of fatherhood? Especially in view of the embarrassing circumstance that his first-born was agirl and not a boy.

The novelty of fatherhood did not wear off. This caused some secret envy among women whosehusbands took offspring for granted, long before the children were christened. He buttonholedpeople on the street and related details of his childs miraculous progress without even prefacinghis remarks with the hypocritical but polite: I know everyone thinks their own child is smart but He thought his daughter marvelous, not to be compared with lesser brats, and he did not carewho knew it. When the new nurse permitted the baby to suck a bit of fat pork, thereby bringing onthe first attack of colic, Rhetts conduct sent seasoned fathers and mothers into gales of laughter.

He hurriedly summoned Dr. Meade and two other doctors, and with difficulty he was restrainedfrom beating the unfortunate with his crop. The was discharged and thereafter followedaseriesofnurseswhorema(nurse) ined,atthemost,aweek.N(nurse) one of them was good enough tosatisfy the exacting requirements Rhett laid down.

Mammy likewise viewed with displeasure the nurses that came and went, for she was jealous ofany strange negro and saw no reason why she could not care for the baby and Wade and Ella, too.

But Mammy was showing her age and rheumatism was slowing her lumbering tread. Rhett lackedthe courage to cite these reasons for employing another nurse. He told her instead that a man of hisposition could not afford to have only one nurse. It did not look well. He would hire two others todo the drudgery and leave her as Mammy-in-chief. This Mammy understood very well. Moreservants were a credit to her position as well as Rhetts. But she would not, she told him firmly,have any trashy free issue niggers in her nursery. So Rhett sent to Tara for Prissy. He knew hershortcomings but, after all, she was a family darky. And Uncle Peter produced a great-niece namedLou who had belonged to one of Miss Pittys Burr cousins.

Even before Scarlett was able to be about again, she noticed Rhetts pre-occupation with thebaby and was somewhat nettled and embarrassed at his pride in her in front of callers. It was allvery well for a man to love his child but she felt there was something unmanly in the display ofsuch love. He should be offhand and careless, as other men were.

You are making a fool of yourself, she said irritably, and I dont see why.

No? Well, you wouldnt. The reason is that shes the first person whos ever belonged utterly tome.

She belongs to me, too!

No, you have two other children. Shes mine.

Great balls of fire! said Scarlett. I had the baby, didnt I? Besides, honey, I belong to you.

Rhett looked at her over the black head of the child and smiled oddly.

Do you, my dear?

Only the entrance of Melanie stopped one of those swift hot quarrels which seemed to spring upso easily between them these days. Scarlett swallowed her wrath and watched Melanie take thebaby. The name agreed upon for the child was Eugenic Victoria, but that afternoon Melanieunwittingly bestowed a name that clung, even as Pittypat had blotted out all memory of SarahJane.

Rhett leaning over the child had said: Her eyes are going to be pea green.

Indeed they are not, cried Melanie indignantly, forgetting that Scarletts eyes were almost thatshade. They are going to be blue, like Mr. OHaras eyes, as blue asas blue as the bonnie blueflag.

Bonnie Blue Butler, laughed Rhett, taking the child from her and peering more closely intothe small eyes. And Bonnie she became until even her parents did not recall that she had beennamed for two queens.

Chapter 51

WHEN SHE WAS FINALLY able to go out again, Scarlett had Lou lace her into stays as tightlyas the strings would pull. Then she passed the tape measure about her waist. Twenty inches! Shegroaned aloud. That was what having babies did to your figure! Her waist was a large as AuntPittys, as large as Mammys.

Pull them tighter, Lou. See if you cant make it eighteen and a half inches or I cant get into anyof my dresses.

Itll bust de strings, said Lou. Yo wais jes done got bigger, Miss Scarlett, an dar ain

nuthin ter do bout it.

There is something to do about it, thought Scarlett as she ripped savagely at the seams of herdress to let out the necessary inches. I just wont have any more babies.

Of course, Bonnie was pretty and a credit to her and Rhett adored the child, but she would nothave another baby. Just how she would manage this she did not know, for she couldnt handleRhett as she had Frank. Rhett wasnt afraid of her. It would probably be difficult with Rhett actingso foolishly about Bonnie and probably wanting a son next year, for all that he said hed drownany boy she gave him. Well, she wouldnt give him a boy or girl either. Three children wereenough for any woman to have.

When Lou had stitched up the ripped seams, pressed them smooth and buttoned Scarlett into thedress, she called the carriage and Scarlett set out for the lumber yard. Her spirits rose as she wentand she forgot about her waist line, for she was going to meet Ashley at the yard to go over thebooks with him. And, if she was lucky, she might see him alone. She hadnt seen him since longbefore Bonnie was born. She hadnt wanted to see him at all when she was so obviously pregnant.

And she had missed the daily contact with him, even if there was always someone around. She had missed the importance and activity of her lumber business while she was immured. Of course, shedid not have to work now. She could easily sell the mills and invest the money for Wade and Ella.

But that would mean she would hardly ever see Ashley, except in a formal social way with crowdsof people around. And working by Ashleys side was her greatest pleasure.

When she drove up to the yard she saw with interest how high the piles of lumber were and howmany customers were standing among them, talking to Hugh Elsing. And there were six muleteams and wagons being loaded by the negro drivers. Six teams, she thought, with pride. And I didall this by myself!

Ashley came to the door of the little office, his eyes joyful with the pleasure of seeing her againand he handed her out of her carriage and into the office as if she were a queen.

But some of her pleasure was dimmed when she went over the books of his null and comparedthem with Johnnie Galleghers books. Ashley had barely made expenses and Johnnie had aremarkable sum to his credit. She forbore to say anything as she looked at the two sheets butAshley read her face.

Scarlett, Im sorry. All I can say is that I wish youd let me hire free darkies instead of usingconvicts. I believe I could do better.

Darkies! Why, their pay would break us. Convicts are dirt cheap. If Johnnie can make thismuch with them

Ashleys eyes went over her shoulder, looking at something she could not see, and the glad lightwent out of his eyes.

I cant work convicts like Johnnie Gallegher. I cant drive men.

Gods nightgown! Johnnies a wonder at it. Ashley, you are just too soft hearted. You ought toget more work out of them. Johnnie told me that any time a malingerer wanted to get out of workhe told you he was sick and you gave him a day off. Good Lord, Ashley! Thats no way to makemoney. A couple of licks will cure most any sickness short of a broken leg

Scarlett! Scarlett! Stop! I cant bear to hear you talk that way, cried Ashley, his eyes comingback to her with a fierceness that stopped her short. Dont you realize that they are mensome ofthem sick, underfed, miserable and Oh, my dear, I cant bear to see the way he has brutalizedyou, you who were always so sweet

Who has whatted me?

Ive got to say it and I havent any right. But Ive got to say it YourRhett Butler. Everythinghe touches he poisons. And he has taken you who were so sweet and generous and gentle, for allyour spirited ways, and he has done this to youhardened you, brutalized you by his contact.

Oh, breathed Scarlett, guilt struggling with joy that Ashley should feel so deeply about her,should still think her sweet. Thank God, he thought Rhett to blame for her penny-pinching ways.

Of course, Rhett had nothing to do with it and the guilt was hers but, after all, another black markon Rhett could do him no harm.

If it were any other man in the world, I wouldnt care so muchbut Rhett Butler! Ive seenwhat hes done to you. Without your realizing it, hes twisted your thoughts into the same hard path his own run in. Oh, yes, I know I shouldnt say this He saved my life and I am grateful but Iwish to God it had been any other man but him! And I havent the right to talk to you like

Oh, Ashley, you have the rightno one else has!

I tell you I cant bear it, seeing your fineness coarsened by him, knowing that your beauty andyour charm are in the keeping of a man who When I think of him touching you, I

Hes going to kiss me! thought Scarlett ecstatically. And it wont be my fault! She swayedtoward him. But he drew back suddenly, as if realizing he had said too muchsaid things he neverintended to say.

I apologize most humbly, Scarlett IIve been insinuating that your husband is not agentleman and my own words have proved that Im not one. No one has a right to criticize ahusband to a wife. I havent any excuse exceptexcept He faltered and his face twisted. Shewaited breathless.

I havent any excuse at all.

All the way home in the carriage Scarletts mind raced. No excuse at all exceptexcept that heloved her! And the thought of her lying in Rhetts arms roused a fury in him that she did not thinkpossible. Well, she could understand that. If it wasnt for the knowledge that his relations withMelanie were, necessarily, those of brother and sister, her own life would be a torment And Rhettsembraces coarsened her, brutalized her! Well, if Ashley thought that, she could do very wellwithout those embraces. She thought how sweet and romantic it would be for them both to bephysically true to each other, even though married to other people. The idea possessed herimagination and she took pleasure in it. And then, too, there was the practical side of it. It wouldmean that she would not have to have any more children.

When she reached home and dismissed the carriage, some of the exaltation which had filled herat Ashleys words began to fade as she faced the prospect of telling Rhett that she wanted separatebedrooms and all which that implied. It would be difficult. Moreover, how could she tell Ashleythat she had denied herself to Rhett, because of his wishes? What earthly good was a sacrifice if noone knew about it? What a burden modesty and delicacy were! If she could only talk to Ashley asfrankly as she could to Rhett! Well, no matter. Shed insinuate the truth to Ashley somehow.

She went up the stairs and, opening the nursery door, found Rhett sitting beside Bonnies cribwith Ella upon his lap and Wade displaying the contents of his pocket to him. What a blessingRhett liked children and made much of them! Some stepfathers were so bitter about children offormer marriages.

I want to talk to you, she said and passed on into their bedroom. Better have this over nowwhile her determination not to have any more children was hot within her and while Ashleys lovewas giving her strength.

Rhett, she said abruptly when he had closed the bedroom door behind him, Ive decided thatI dont want any more children.

If he was startled at her unexpected statement he did not show it. He lounged to a chair andsitting down, tilted it back.

My pet, as I told you before Bonnie was born, it is immaterial to me whether you have onechild or twenty.

How perverse of him to evade the issue so neatly, as if not caring whether children came hadanything to do with their actual arrival.

I think three are enough. I dont intend to have one every year.

Three seems an adequate number.

You know very well she began, embarrassment making her cheeks red. You know what Imean?

I do. Do you realize that I can divorce you for refusing me my marital rights?

You are just low enough to think of something like that, she cried, annoyed that nothing wasgoing as she planned it. If you had any chivalry youdyoud be nice like Well, look at AshleyWilkes. Melanie cant have any children and he

Quite the little gentleman, Ashley, said Rhett and his eyes began to gleam oddly. Pray go onwith your discourse.

Scarlett choked, for her discourse was at its end and she had nothing more to say. Now she sawhow foolish had been her hope of amicably settling so important a matter, especially with a selfishswine like Rhett.

Youve been to the lumber office this afternoon, havent you?

What has that to do with it?

You like dogs, dont you, Scarlett? Do you prefer them in kennels or mangers?

The allusion was lost on her as the tide of her anger and disappointment rose.

He got lightly to his feet and coming to her put his hand under her chin and jerked her face up tohis.

What a child you are! You have lived with three men and still know nothing of mens natures.

You seem to think they are like old ladies past the change of life.

He pinched her chin playfully and his hand dropped away from her. One black eyebrow went upas he bent a cool long look on her.

Scarlett, understand this. If you and your bed still held any charms for me, no looks and noentreaties could keep me away. And I would have no sense of shame for anything I did, for I madea bargain with youa bargain which I have kept and you are now breaking. Keep your chaste bed,my dear.

Do you mean to tell me, cried Scarlett indignantly, that you dont care

You have tired of me, havent you? Well, men tire more easily than women. Keep your sanctity,Scarlett. It will work no hardship on me. It doesnt matter, he shrugged and grinned. Fortunatelythe world is full of bedsand most of the beds are full of women.

You mean youd actually be so

My dear innocent! But, of course. Its a wonder I havent strayed long ere this. I never heldfidelity to be a virtue.

I shall lock my door every night!

Why bother? If I wanted you, no lock would keep me out.

He turned, as though the subject were closed, and left the room. Scarlett heard him going backto the nursery where he was welcomed by the children. She sat down abruptly. She had had herway. This was what she wanted and Ashley wanted. But it was not making her happy. Her vanitywas sore and she was mortified at the thought that Rhett had taken it all so lightly, that he didntwant her, that he put her on the level of other women in other beds.

She wished she could think of some delicate way to tell Ashley that she and Rhett were nolonger actually man and wife. But she knew now she could not. It all seemed a terrible mess nowand she half heartedly wished she had said nothing about it. She would miss the long amusingconversations in bed with Rhett when the ember of his cigar glowed in the dark. She would missthe comfort of his arms when she woke terrified from the dreams that she was running throughcold mist.

Suddenly she felt very unhappy and leaning her head on the arm of the chair, she cried.

Chapter 52

ONE RAINY AFTERNOON when Bonnie was barely past her first birthday, Wade moped aboutthe sitting room, occasionally going to the window and flattening his nose on the dripping pane.

He was a slender, weedy boy, small for his eight years, quiet almost to shyness, never speakingunless spoken to. He was bored and obviously at loss for entertainment, for Ella was busy in thecorner with her dolls, Scarlett was at her secretary muttering to herself as she added a long columnof figures, and Rhett was lying on the floor, swinging his watch by its chain, just out of Bonniesreach.

After Wade had picked up several books and let them drop with bangs and sighed deeply,Scarlett turned to him in irritation.

Heavens, Wade! Run out and play.

I cant. Its raining.

Is it? I hadnt noticed. Well, do something. You make me nervous, fidgeting about. Go tell Porkto hitch up the carriage and take you over to play with Beau.

He isnt home, sighed Wade. Hes at Raoul Picards birthday party.

Raoul was the small son of Maybelle and Ren Picarda detestable little brat, Scarlett thought,more like an ape than a child.

Well, you can go to see anyone you want to. Run tell Pork.

Nobodys at home, answered Wade. Everybodys at the party.

The unspoken words everybodybut me hung in the air; but Scarlett, her mind on her account books, paid no heed.

Rhett raised himself to a sitting posture and said: Why arent you at the party too, son?

Wade edged closer to him, scuffing one foot and looking unhappy.

I wasnt invited, sir.

Rhett handed his watch into Bonnies destructive grasp and rose lightly to his feet.

Leave those damned figures alone, Scarlett. Why wasnt Wade invited to this party?

For Heavens sake, Rhett! Dont bother me now. Ashley has gotten these accounts in an awfulsnarl Oh, that party? Well, I think its nothing unusual that Wade wasnt invited and I wouldntlet him go if he had been. Dont forget that Raoul is Mrs. Merriwethers grandchild and Mrs.

Merriwether would as soon have a free issue nigger in her sacred parlor as one of us.

Rhett, watching Wades face with meditative eyes, saw the boy flinch.

Come here, son, he said, drawing the boy to him. Would you like to be at that party?

No, sir, said Wade bravely but his eyes fell.

Hum. Tell me, Wade, do you go to little Joe Whitings parties or Frank Bonnells orwell, anyof your playmates?

No, sir. I dont get invited to many parties.

Wade, you are lying! cried Scarlett, turning. You went to three last week, the Bart childrensparty and the Gelerts and the Hundons.

As choice a collection of mules in horse harness as you could group together, said Rhett, hisvoice going into a soft drawl. Did you have a good time at those parties? Speak up.

No, sir.

Why not?

II dunno, sir. MammyMammy says theyre white trash.

Ill skin Mammy this minute! cried Scarlett, leaping to her feet And as for you, Wade, talkingso about Mothers friends

The boys telling the truth and so is Mammy, said Rhett. But, of course, youve never beenable to know the truth if you met it in the road. ... Dont bother, son. You dont have to go to anymore parties you dont want to go to. Here, he pulled a bill from his pocket, tell Pork to harnessthe carriage and take you downtown. Buy yourself some candya lot, enough to give you awonderful stomach ache.

Wade, beaming, pocketed the bill and looked anxiously toward his mother for confirmation. Butshe, with a pucker in her brows, was watching Rhett. He had picked Bonnie from the floor and wascradling her to him, her small face against his cheek. She could not read his face but there wassomething in his eyes almost like fearfear and self-accusation.

Wade, encouraged by his stepfathers generosity, came shyly toward him.

Uncle Rhett, can I ask you sumpin?

Of course. Rhetts look was anxious, absent, as he held Bonnies head closer. What is it,Wade?

Uncle Rhett, were youdid you fight in the war?

Rhetts eyes came alertly back and they were sharp, but his voice was casual.

Why do you ask, son?

Well, Joe Whiting said you didnt and so did Frankie Bonnell.

Ah, said Rhett, and what did you tell them?

Wade looked unhappy.

II saidI told them I didnt know. And with a rush, But I didnt care and I hit them. Wereyou in the war, Uncle Rhett?

Yes, said Rhett, suddenly violent I was in the war. I was in the army for eight months. Ifought all the way from Lovejoy up to Franklin, Tennessee. And I was with Johnston when hesurrendered.

Wade wriggled with pride but Scarlett laughed.

I thought you were ashamed of your war record, she said. Didnt you tell me to keep itquiet?

Hush, he said briefly. Does that satisfy you, Wade?

Oh, yes, sir! I knew you were in the war. I knew you werent scared like they said. Butwhywerent you with the other little boys fathers?

Because the other little boys fathers were such fools they had to put them in the infantry. I wasa West Pointer and so I was in the artillery. In the regular artillery, Wade, not the Home Guard. Ittakes a pile of sense to be in the artillery, Wade.

I bet, said Wade, his face shining. Did you get wounded, Uncle Rhett?

Rhett hesitated.

Tell him about your dysentery, jeered Scarlett.

Rhett carefully set the baby on the floor and pulled his shirt and undershirt out of his trouserband.

Come here, Wade, and Ill show you where I was wounded.

Wade advanced, excited, and gazed where Rhetts finger pointed. A long raised scar ran acrosshis brown chest and down into his heavily muscled abdomen. It was the souvenir of a knife fight inthe California gold fields but Wade did not know it. He breathed heavily and happily.

I guess youre bout as brave as my father, Uncle Rhett.

Almost but not quite, said Rhett, stuffing his shirt into his trousers. Now, go on and spendyour dollar and whale hell out of any boy who says I wasnt in the army.

Wade went dancing out happily, calling to Pork, and Rhett picked up the baby again.

Now why all these lies, my gallant soldier laddie? asked Scarlett.

A boy has to be proud of his fatheror stepfather. I cant let him be ashamed before the otherlittle brutes. Cruel creatures, children.

Oh, fiddle-dee-dee!

I never thought about what it meant to Wade, said Rhett slowly. I never thought how hessuffered. And its not going to be that way for Bonnie.

What way?

Do you think Im going to have my Bonnie ashamed of her father? Have her left out of partieswhen shes nine or ten? Do you think Im going to have her humiliated like Wade for things thatarent her fault but yours and mine?

Oh, childrens parties!

Out of childrens parties grow young girls dbut parties. Do you think Im going to let mydaughter grow up outside of everything decent in Atlanta? Im not going to send her North toschool and to visit because she wont be accepted here or in Charleston or Savannah or New Orleans.

And Im not going to see her forced to marry a Yankee or a foreigner because no decentSouthern family will have herbecause her mother was a fool and her father a blackguard.

Wade, who had come back to the door, was an interested but puzzled listener.

Bonnie can marry Beau, Uncle Rhett.

The anger went from Rhetts face as he turned to the little boy, and he considered his words withapparent seriousness as he always did when dealing with the children.

Thats true, Wade. Bonnie can marry Beau Wilkes, but who will you marry?

Oh, I shant marry anyone, said Wade confidently, luxuriating in a man-to-man talk with theone person, except Aunt Melly, who never reproved and always encouraged him. Im going to goto Harvard and be a lawyer, like my father, and then Im going to be a brave soldier just like him.

I wish Melly would keep her mouth shut, cried Scarlett. Wade, you are not going to Harvard.

Its a Yankee school and I wont have you going to a Yankee school. You are going to theUniversity of Georgia and after you graduate you are going to manage the store for me. And as foryour father being a brave soldier

Hush, said Rhett curtly, not missing the shining light in Wades eyes when he spoke of thefather he had never known. You grow up and be a brave man like your father, Wade. Try to be justlike him, for he was a hero and dont let anyone tell you differently. He married your mother,didnt he? Well, thats proof enough of heroism. And Ill see that you go to Harvard and become alawyer. Now, run along and tell Pork to take you to town.

Ill thank you to let me manage my children, cried Scarlett as Wade obediently trotted fromthe room.

Youre a damned poor manager. Youve wrecked whatever chances Ella and Wade had, but I wont permit you to do Bonnie that way. Bonnies going to be a little princess and everyone in theworld is going to want her. Theres not going to be any place she cant go. Good God, do you thinkIm going to let her grow up and associate with the riffraff that fills this house?

They are good enough for you

And a damned sight too good for you, my pet. But not for Bonnie. Do you think Id let hermarry any of this runagate gang you spend your time with? Irishmen on the make, Yankees, whitetrash, Carpetbag parvenus My Bonnie with her Butler blood and her Robillard strain

The OHaras

The OHaras might have been kings of Ireland once but your father was nothing but a smartMick on the make. And you are no better But then, Im at fault too. Ive gone through life like abat out of hell, never caring what I did, because nothing ever mattered to me. But Bonnie matters.

God, what a fool Ive been! Bonnie wouldnt be received in Charleston, no matter what my motheror your Aunt Eulalie or Aunt Pauline didand its obvious that she wont be received here unlesswe do something quickly

Oh, Rhett, you take it so seriously youre funny. With our money

Damn our money! All our money cant buy what I want for her. Id rather Bonnie was invitedto eat dry bread in the Picards miserable house or Mrs. Elsings rickety barn than to be the belle ofa Republican inaugural ball. Scarlett, youve been a fool. You should have insured a place for yourchildren in the social scheme years agobut you didnt. You didnt even bother to keep whatposition you had. And its too much to hope that youll mend your ways at this late date. Youretoo anxious to make money and too fond of bullying people.

I consider this whole affair a tempest in a teapot, said Scarlett coldly, rattling her papers toindicate that as far as she was concerned the discussion was finished.

We have only Mrs. Wilkes to help us and you do your best to alienate and insult her. Oh, spareme your remarks about her poverty and her tacky clothes. Shes the soul and the center ofeverything in Atlanta thats sterling. Thank God for her. Shell help me do something about it.

And what are you going to do?

Do? Im going to cultivate every female dragon of the Old Guard in this town, especially Mrs.

Merriwether, Mrs. Elsing, Mrs. Whiting and Mrs. Meade. If I have to crawl on my belly to everyfat old cat who hates me, Ill do it. Ill be meek under their coldness and repentant of my evil ways.

Ill contribute to their damned charities and Ill go to their damned churches. Ill admit and bragabout my services to the Confederacy and, if worst comes to worst, Ill join their damned Klanthough a merciful God could hardly lay so heavy a penance on my shoulders as that. And I shallnot hesitate to remind the fools whose necks I saved that they owe me a debt. And you, Madam,will kindly refrain from undoing my work behind my back and foreclosing mortgages on any ofthe people Im courting or selling them rotten lumber or in other ways insulting them. AndGovernor Bullock never sets foot in this house again. Do you hear? And none of this gang ofelegant thieves youve been associating with, either. If you do invite them, over my request, youwill find yourself in the embarrassing position of having no host in your home. If they come in thishouse, I will spend the time in Belle Watlings bar telling anyone who cares to hear that I wont stay under the same roof with them.

Scarlett, who had been smarting under his words, laughed shortly.

So the river-boat gambler and the speculator is going to be respectable! Well, your first movetoward respectability had better be the sale of Belle Watlings house.

That was a shot in the dark. She had never been absolutely certain that Rhett owned the house.

He laughed suddenly, as though he read her mind.

Thanks for the suggestion.

Had he tried, Rhett could not have chosen a more difficult time to beat his way back torespectability. Never before or after did the names Republican and Scalawag carry such odium, fornow the corruption of the Carpet bag regime was at its height. And, since the surrender, Rhettsname had been inextricably linked with Yankees, Republicans and Scalawags.

Atlanta people had thought, with helpless fury, in 1866, that nothing could be worse than theharsh military rule they had then, but now, under Bullock, they were learning the worst. Thanks tothe negro vote, the Republicans and their allies were firmly entrenched and they were ridingrough-shod over the powerless but still protesting minority.

Word had been spread among the negroes that there were only two political parties mentioned inthe Bible, the Publicans and the Sinners. No negro wanted to join a party made up entirely ofsinners, so they hastened to join the Republicans. Their new masters voted them over and overagain, electing poor whites and Scalawags to high places, electing even some negroes. Thesenegroes sat in the legislature where they spent most of their time eating goobers and easing theirunaccustomed feet into and out of new shoes. Few of them could read or write. They were freshfrom cotton patch and canebrake, but it was within their power to vote taxes and bonds as well asenormous expense accounts to themselves and their Republican friends. And they voted them. Thestate staggered under taxes which were paid in fury, for the taxpayers knew that much of themoney voted for public purposes was finding its way into private pockets.

Completely surrounding the state capital was a host of promoters, speculators, seekers aftercontracts and others hoping to profit from the orgy of spending, and many were growingshamelessly rich. They had no difficulty at all in obtaining the states money for building railroadsthat were never built, for buying cars and engines that were never bought, for erecting publicbuildings that never existed except in the minds of their promoters.

Bonds were issued running into the millions. Most of them were illegal and fraudulent but theywere issued just the same. The state treasurer, a Republican but an honest man, protested againstthe illegal issues and refused to sign them, but he and others who sought to check the abuses coulddo nothing against the tide that was running.

The state-owned railroad had once been an asset to the state but now it was a liability and itsdebts had piled up to the million mark. It was no longer a railroad. It was an enormous bottomlesstrough in which the hogs could swill and wallow. Many of its officials were appointed for politicalreasons, regardless of their knowledge of the operation of railroads, there were three times as many people employed as were necessary, Republicans rode free on passes, carloads of negroes rode freeon their happy jaunts about the state to vote and revote in the same elections.

The mismanagement of the state road especially infuriated the taxpayers for, out of the earningsof the road, was to come the money for free schools. But there were no earnings, there were onlydebts, and so there were no free schools and there was a generation of children growing up inignorance who would spread the seeds of illiteracy down the years.

But far and above their anger at the waste and mismanagement and graft was the resentment ofthe people at the bad light in which the governor represented them in the North. When Georgiahowled against corruption, the governor hastily went North, appeared before Congress and told ofwhite outrages against negroes, of Georgias preparation for another rebellion and the need for astern military rule in the state. No Georgian wanted trouble with the negroes and they tried toavoid trouble. No one wanted another war, no one wanted or needed bayonet rule. All Georgiawanted was to be let alone so the state could recuperate. But with the operation of what came to beknown as the governors slander mill, the North saw only a rebellious state that needed a heavyhand, and a heavy hand was laid upon it.

It was a glorious spree for the gang which had Georgia by the throat. There was an orgy ofgrabbing and over all there was a cold cynicism about open theft in high places that was chilling tocontemplate. Protests and efforts to resist accomplished nothing, for the state government wasbeing upheld and supported by the power of the United States Army.

Atlanta cursed the name of Bullock and his Scalawags and Republicans and they cursed thename of anyone connected with them. And Rhett was connected with them. He had been in withthem, so everyone said, in all their schemes. But now, he turned against the stream in which he haddrifted so short a while before, and began swimming arduously back against the current.

He went about his campaign slowly, subtly, not arousing the suspicions of Atlanta by thespectacle of a leopard trying to change his spots overnight. He avoided his dubious cronies andwas seen no more in the company of Yankee officers, Scalawags and Republicans. He attendedDemocratic rallies and he ostentatiously voted the Democratic ticket. He gave up high-stake cardgames and stayed comparatively sober. If he went to Belle Watlings house at all, he went by nightand by stealth as did more respectable townsmen, instead of leaving his horse hitched in front ofher door in the afternoons as an advertisement of his presence within.

And the congregation of the Episcopal Church almost fell out of their pews when he tiptoed in,late for services, with Wades hand held in his. The congregation was as much stunned by Wadesappearance as by Rhetts, for the little boy was supposed to be a Catholic. At least, Scarlett wasone. Or she was supposed to be one. But she had not put foot in the church in years, for religionhad gone from her as many of Ellens other teachings had gone. Everyone thought she hadneglected her boys religious education and thought more of Rhett for trying to rectify the matter,even if he did take the boy to the Episcopal Church instead of the Catholic.

Rhett could be grave of manner and charming when he chose to restrain his tongue and keep hisblack eyes from dancing maliciously. It had been years since he had chosen to do this but he did itnow, putting on gravity and charm, even as he put on waistcoats of more sober hues. It was notdifficult to gain a foothold of friendliness with the men who owed their necks to him. They would have showed their appreciation long ago, had Rhett not acted as if their appreciation were a matterof small moment. Now, Hugh Elsing, Ren, the Simmons boys, Andy Bonnell and the others foundhim pleasant, diffident about putting himself forward and embarrassed when they spoke of theobligation they owed him.

It was nothing, he would protest. In my place youd have all done the same thing.

He subscribed handsomely to the fund for the repairs of the Episcopal Church and he gave alarge, but not vulgarly large, contribution to the Association for the Beautification of the Graves ofOur Glorious Dead. He sought out Mrs. Elsing to make this donation and embarrassedly beggedthat she keep his gift a secret, knowing very well that this would spur her to spreading the news.

Mrs. Elsing hated to take his moneyspeculator moneybut the Association needed moneybadly.

I dont see why you of all people should be subscribing, she said acidly.

When Rhett told her with the proper sober mien that he was moved to contribute by thememories of former comrades in arms, braver than he but less fortunate, who now lay in unmarkedgraves, Mrs. Elsings aristocratic jaw dropped. Dolly Merriwether had told her Scarlett had saidCaptain Butler was in the army but, of course, she hadnt believed it. Nobody had believed it.

You in the army? What was your companyyour regiment?

Rhett gave them.

Oh, the artillery! Everyone I knew was either in the cavalry or the infantry. Then, that explains She broke off, disconcerted, expecting to see his eyes snap with that ice. But he only lookeddown and toyed with his watch chain.

I would have liked the infantry, he said, passing completely over her insinuation, but whenthey found that I was a West Pointerthough I did not graduate, Mrs. Elsing, due to a boyishprankthey put me in the artillery, the regular artillery, not the militia. They needed men withspecialized knowledge in that last campaign. You know how heavy the losses had been, so manyartillerymen killed. It was pretty lonely in the artillery. I didnt see a soul I knew. I dont believe Isaw a single man from Atlanta during my whole service.

Well! said Mrs. Elsing, confused. If he had been in the army then she was wrong. She hadmade many sharp remarks about his cowardice and the memory of them made her feel guilty.

Well! And why havent you ever told anybody about your service? You act as though you wereashamed of it.

Rhett looked her squarely in the eyes, his face blank.

Mrs. Elsing, he said earnestly, believe me when I say that I am prouder of my services to theConfederacy than of anything I have ever done or will do. I feelI feel

Well, why did you keep it hidden?

I was ashamed to speak of it, in the light ofof some of my former actions.

Mrs. Elsing reported the contribution and the conversation in detail to Mrs. Merriwether.

And, Dolly, I give you my word that when he said that about being ashamed, tears came into his eyes! Yes, tears! I nearly cried myself.

Stuff and nonsense! cried Mrs. Merriwether in disbelief. I dont believe tears came into hiseyes any more than I believe he was in the army. And I can find out mighty quick. If he was in thatartillery outfit, I can get at the truth, for Colonel Carleton who commanded it married the daughterof one of my grandfathers sisters and Ill write him.

She wrote Colonel Carlton and to her consternation received a reply praising Rhetts services inno uncertain terms. A born artilleryman, a brave soldier and an uncomplaining gentleman, amodest man who wouldnt even take a commission when it was offered him.

Well! said Mrs. Merriwether showing the letter to Mrs. Elsing. You can knock me down witha feather! Maybe we did misjudge the scamp about not being a soldier. Maybe we should havebelieved what Scarlett and Melanie said about him enlisting the day the town fell. But, just thesame, hes a Scalawag and a rascal and I dont like him!

Somehow, said Mrs. Elsing uncertainly, somehow, I dont think hes so bad. A man whofought for the Confederacy cant be all bad. Its Scarlett who is the bad one. Do you know, Dolly, Ireally believe that hewell, hes ashamed of Scarlett but is too much of a gentleman to let on.

Ashamed! Pooh! Theyre both cut out of the same piece of cloth. Where did you ever get sucha silly notion?

It isnt silly, said Mrs. Elsing indignantly. Yesterday, in the pouring rain, he had those threechildren, even the baby, mind you, out in his carriage riding them up and down Peachtree Streetand he gave me a lift home. And when I said: Captain Butler, have you lost your mind keepingthese children out in the damp? Why dont you take them home?And he didnt say a word but justlooked embarrassed. But Mammy spoke up and said: De house full of wite trash an it healthierfer de chillun in de rain dan at home!

What did he say?

What could he say? He just scowled at Mammy and passed it over. You know Scarlett wasgiving a big whist party yesterday afternoon with all those common ordinary women there. I guesshe didnt want them kissing his baby.

Well! said Mrs. Merriwether, wavering but still obstinate. But the next week she, too,capitulated.

Rhett now had a desk in the bank. What he did at this desk the bewildered officials of the bankdid not know, but he owned too large a block of the stock for them to protest his presence there.

After a while they forgot that they had objected to him for he was quiet and well mannered andactually knew something about banking and investments. At any rate he sat at his desk all day,giving every appearance of industry, for he wished to be on equal terms with his respectable fellowtownsmen who worked and worked hard.

Mrs. Merriwether, wishing to expand her growing bakery, had tried to borrow two thousanddollars from the bank with her house as security. She had been refused because there were alreadytwo mortgages on the house. The stout old lady was storming out of the bank when Rhett stoppedher, learned the trouble and said, worriedly: But there must be some mistake, Mrs. Merriwether.

Some dreadful mistake. You of all people shouldnt have to bother about collateral. Why, Id lendyou money just on your word! Any lady who could build up the business youve built up is the bestrisk in the world. The bank wants to lend money to people like you. Now, do sit down right here inmy chair and I will attend to it for you.

When he came back he was smiling blandly, saying that there had been a mistake, just as he hadthought. The two thousand dollars was right there waiting for her whenever she cared to drawagainst it. Now, about her housewould she just sign right here?

Mrs. Merriwether, torn with indignation and insult, furious that she had to take this favor from aman she disliked and distrusted, was hardly gracious in her thanks.

But he failed to notice it As he escorted her to the door, he said: Mrs. Merriwether, I havealways had a great regard for your knowledge and I wonder if you could tell me something?

The plumes on her bonnet barely moved as she nodded.

What did you do when your Maybelle was little and she sucked her thumb?

What?

My Bonnie sucks her thumb. I cant make her stop it.

You should make her stop it, said Mrs. Merriwether vigorously. It will ruin the shape of hermouth.

I know! I know! And she has a beautiful mouth. But I dont know what to do.

Well, Scarlett ought to know, said Mrs. Merriwether shortly. Shes had two other children.

Rhett looked down at his shoes and sighed.

Ive tried putting soap under her finger nails, he said, passing over her remark about Scarlett.

Soap! Bah! Soap is no good at all. I put quinine on Maybelles thumb and let me tell you,Captain Butler, she stopped sucking that thumb mighty quick.

Quinine! I would never have thought of it! I cant thank you enough, Mrs. Merriwether. It wasworrying me.

He gave her a smile, so pleasant, so grateful that Mrs. Merriwether stood uncertainly for amoment. But as she told him good-by she was smiling too. She hated to admit to Mrs. Elsing thatshe had misjudged the man but she was an honest person and she said there had to be somethinggood about a man who loved his child. What a pity Scarlett took no interest in so pretty a creatureas Bonnie! There was something pathetic about a man trying to raise a little girl all by himself!

Rhett knew very well the pathos of the spectacle, and if it blackened Scarletts reputation he didnot care.

From the time the child could walk he took her about with him constantly, in the carriage or infront of his saddle. When he came home from the bank in the afternoon, he took her walking downPeachtree Street, holding her hand, slowing his long strides to her toddling steps, patientlyanswering her thousand questions. People were always in their front yards or on their porches atsunset and, as Bonnie was such a friendly, pretty child, with her tangle of black curls and her bright blue eyes, few could resist talking to her. Rhett never presumed on these conversations but stoodby, exuding fatherly pride and gratification at the notice taken of his daughter.

Atlanta had a long memory and was suspicious and slow to change. Times were hard and feelingwas bitter against anyone who had had anything to do with Bullock and his crowd. But Bonnie hadthe combined charm of Scarlett and Rhett at their best and she was the small opening wedge Rhettdrove into the wall of Atlantas coldness.

Bonnie grew rapidly and every day it became more evident that Gerald OHara had been hergrandfather. She had short sturdy legs and wide eyes of Irish blue and a small square jaw that wentwith a determination to have her own way. She had Geralds sudden temper to which she gave ventin screaming tantrums that were forgotten as soon as her wishes were gratified. And as long as herfather was near her, they were always gratified hastily. He spoiled her despite all the efforts ofMammy and Scarlett, for in all things she pleased him, except one. And that was her fear of thedark.

Until she was two years old she went to sleep readily in the nursery she shared with Wade andElla. Then, for no apparent reason, she began to sob whenever Mammy waddled out of the room,carrying the lamp. From this she progressed to wakening in the late night hours, screaming withterror, frightening the other two children and alarming the house. Once Dr. Meade had to be calledand Rhett was short with him when he diagnosed only bad dreams. All anyone could get from herwas one word, Dark.

Scarlett was inclined to be irritated with the child and favored a spanking. She would not humorher by leaving a lamp burning in the nursery, for then Wade and Ella would be unable to sleep.

Rhett, worried but gentle, attempting to extract further information from his daughter, said coldlythat if any spanking were done, he would do it personally and to Scarlett.

The upshot of the situation was that Bonnie was removed from the nursery to the room Rhettnow occupied alone. Her small bed was placed beside his large one and a shaded lamp burned onthe table all night long. The town buzzed when this story got about. Somehow, there wassomething indelicate about a girl child sleeping in her fathers room, even though the girl was onlytwo years old. Scarlett suffered from this gossip in two ways. First, it proved indubitably that sheand her husband occupied separate rooms, in itself a shocking enough state of affairs. Second,everyone thought that if the child was afraid to sleep alone, her place was with her mother. AndScarlett did not feel equal to explaining that she could not sleep in a lighted room nor would Rhettpermit the child to sleep with her.

Youd never wake up unless she screamed and then youd probably slap her, he said shortly.

Scarlett was annoyed at the weight he attached to Bonnies night terrors but she thought shecould eventually remedy the state of affairs and transfer the child back to the nursery. All childrenwere afraid of the dark and the only cure was firmness. Rhett was just being perverse in the matter,making her appear a poor mother, just to pay her back for banishing him from her room.

He had never put foot in her room or even rattled the door knob since the night she told him shedid not want any more children. Thereafter and until he began staying at home on account of Bonnies fears, he had been absent from the supper table more often than he had been present.

Sometimes he had stayed out all night and Scarlett, lying awake behind her locked door, hearingthe clock count off the early morning hours, wondered where he was. She remembered: There areother beds, my dear! Though the thought made her writhe, there was nothing she could do aboutit. There was nothing she could say that would not precipitate a scene in which he would be sure toremark upon her locked door and the probable connection Ashley had with it. Yes, his foolishnessabout Bonnie sleeping in a lighted roomin his lighted roomwas just a mean way of paying herback.

She did not realize the importance he attached to Bonnies foolishness nor the completeness ofhis devotion to the child until one dreadful night. The family never forgot that night.

That day Rhett had met an ex-blockade runner and they had had much to say to each other.

Where they had gone to talk and drink, Scarlett did not know but she suspected, of course, BelleWatlings house. He did not come home in the afternoon to take Bonnie walking nor did he comehome to supper. Bonnie, who had watched from the window impatiently all afternoon, anxious todisplay a mangled collection of beetles and roaches to her father, had finally been put to bed byLou, amid wails and protests.

Either Lou had forgotten to light the lamp or it had burned out. No one ever knew exactly whathappened but when Rhett finally came home, somewhat the worse for drink, the house was in anuproar and Bonnies screams reached him even in the stables. She had waked in darkness andcalled for him and he had not been there. All the nameless horrors that peopled her small imaginationclutched her. All the soothing and bright lights brought by Scarlett and the servants could notquiet her and Rhett, coming up the stairs three at a jump, looked like a man who has seen Death.

When he finally had her in his arms and from her sobbing gasps had recognized only one word,Dark, he turned on Scarlett and the negroes in fury.

Who put out the light? Who left her alone in the dark? Prissy, Ill skin you for this, you

Gawdlmighty, Mist Rhett! Twarnt me! Twuz Lou!

Fo Gawd, Mist Rhett, Ah

Shut up. You know my orders. By God, Illget out. Dont come back. Scarlett, give her somemoney and see that shes gone before I come down stairs. Now, everybody get out, everybody!

The negroes fled, the luckless Lou wailing into her apron. But Scarlett remained. It was hard tosee her favorite child quieting in Rhetts arms when she had screamed so pitifully in her own. Itwas hard to see the small arms going around his neck and hear the choking voice relate what hadfrightened her, when she, Scarlett, had gotten nothing coherent out of her.

So it sat on your chest, said Rhett softly. Was it a big one?

Oh, yes! Dretfull big. And claws.

Ah, claws, too. Well, now. I shall certainly sit up all night and shoot him if he comes back.

Rhetts voice was interested and soothing and Bonnies sobs died away. Her voice became lesschoked as she went into detailed description of her monster guest in a language which only hecould understand. Irritation stirred in Scarlett as Rhett discussed the matter as if it had been something real.

For Heavens sake, Rhett

But he made a sign for silence. When Bonnie was at last asleep, he laid her in her bed and pulledup the sheet.

Im going to skin that nigger alive, he said quietly. Its your fault too. Why didnt you comeup here to see if the light was burning?

Dont be a fool, Rhett, she whispered. She gets this way because you humor her. Lots ofchildren are afraid of the dark but they get over it. Wade was afraid but I didnt pamper him. Ifyoud just let her scream for a night or two

Let her scream! For a moment Scarlett thought he would hit her. Either you are a fool or themost inhuman woman Ive ever seen.

I dont want her to grow up nervous and cowardly.

Cowardly? Hells afire! There isnt a cowardly bone in her body! But you havent anyimagination and, of course, you cant appreciate the tortures of people who have oneespecially achild. If something with claws and horns came and sat on your chest, youd tell it to get the hell offyou, wouldnt you? Like hell you would. Kindly remember, Madam, that Ive seen you wake upsqualling like a scalded cat simply because you dreamed of running in a fog. And thats not been solong ago either!

Scarlett was taken aback, for she never liked to think of that dream. Moreover, it embarrassedher to remember that Rhett had comforted her in much the same manner he comforted Bonnie. Soshe swung rapidly to a different attack.

You are just humoring her and

And I intend to keep on humoring her. If I do, shell outgrow it and forget about it.

Then, said Scarlett acidly, if you intend to play nursemaid, you might try coming homenights and sober too, for a change.

I shall come home early but drunk as a fiddlers bitch if I please.

He did come home early thereafter, arriving long before time for Bonnie to be put to bed. He satbeside her, holding her hand until sleep loosened her grasp. Only then did he tiptoe downstairs,leaving the lamp burning brightly and the door ajar so he might hear her should she awake andbecome frightened. Never again did he intend her to have a recurrence of fear of the dark. Thewhole household was acutely conscious of the burning light, Scarlett, Mammy, Prissy and Pork,frequently tiptoeing upstairs to make sure that it still burned.

He came home sober too, but that was none of Scarletts doing. For months he had beendrinking heavily, though he was never actually drunk, and one evening the smell of whisky wasespecially strong upon his breath. He picked up Bonnie, swung her to his shoulder and asked her:

Have you a kiss for your sweetheart?

She wrinkled her small upturned nose and wriggled to get down from his arms.

No, she said frankly. Nasty.

Im what?

Smell nasty. Uncle Ashley dont smell nasty.

Well, Ill be damned, he said ruefully, putting her on the floor. I never expected to find atemperance advocate in my own home, of all places!

But, thereafter, he limited his drinking to a glass of wine after supper. Bonnie, who was alwayspermitted to have the last drops in the glass, did not think the smell of wine nasty at all. As theresult, the puffiness which had begun to obscure the hard lines of his cheeks slowly disappearedand the circles beneath his black eyes were not so dark or so harshly cut. Because Bonnie liked toride on the front of his saddle, he stayed out of doors more and the sunburn began to creep acrosshis dark face, making him swarthier than ever. He looked healthier and laughed more and wasagain like the dashing young blockader who had excited Atlanta early in the war.

People who had never liked him came to smile as he went by with the small figure perchedbefore him on his saddle. Women who had heretofore believed that no woman was safe with him,began to stop and talk with him on the streets, to admire Bonnie. Even the strictest old ladies feltthat a man who could discuss the ailments and problems of childhood as well as he did could notbe altogether bad.

Chapter 53

IT WAS Ashleys birthday and Melanie was giving him a surprise reception that night. Everyoneknew about the reception, except Ashley. Even Wade and little Beau knew and were sworn tosecrecy that puffed them up with pride. Everyone in Atlanta who was nice had been invited andwas coming. General Gordon and his family had graciously accepted, Alexander Stephens wouldbe present if his ever-uncertain health permitted and even Bob Toombs, the stormy petrel of theConfederacy, was expected.

All that morning, Scarlett, with Melanie, India and Aunt Pitty flew about the little house,directing the negroes as they hung freshly laundered curtains, polished silver, waxed the floor andcooked, stirred and tasted the refreshments. Scarlett had never seen Melanie so excited or sohappy.

You see, dear, Ashley hasnt had a birthday party sincesince, you remember the barbecue atTwelve Oaks? The day we heard about Mr. Lincolns call for volunteers? Well, he hasnt had abirthday party since then. And he works so hard and hes so tired when he gets home at night thathe really hasnt thought about today being his birthday. And wont he be surprised after supperwhen everybody troops in!

How you goin to manage them lanterns on the lawn without Mr. Wilkes seein them when hecomes home to supper? demanded Archie grumpily.

He had sat all morning watching the preparations, interested but unwilling to admit it. He hadnever been behind the scenes at a large town folks party and it was a new experience. He madefrank remarks about women running around like the house was afire, just because they were having company, but wild horses could not have dragged him from the scene. The colored-paperlanterns which Mrs. Elsing and Fanny had made and painted for the occasion held a special interestfor him, as he had never seen sech contraptions before. They had been hidden in his room in thecellar and he had examined them minutely.

Mercy! I hadnt thought of that! cried Melanie. Archie, how fortunate that you mentioned it.

Dear, dear! What shall I do? Theyve got to be strung on the bushes and trees and little candles putin them and lighted just at the proper time when the guests are arriving. Scarlett, can you send Porkdown to do it while were eating supper?

Miz Wilkes, you got more sense than most women but you gits flurried right easy, said Archie.

And as for that fool nigger, Pork, he aint got no bizness with them thar contraptions. Hed setthem afire in no time. They areright pretty, he conceded. Ill hang them for you, whilst youand Mr. Wilkes are eatin.

Oh, Archie, how kind of you! Melanie turned childlike eyes of gratitude and dependence uponhim. I dont know what I should do without you. Do you suppose you could go put the candles inthem now, so wed have that much out of the way?

Well, I could, praps, said Archie ungraciously and stumped off toward the cellar stairs.

Theres more ways of killing a cat than choking him to death with butter, giggled Melaniewhen the whiskered old man had thumped down the stairs. I had intended all along for Archie toput up those lanterns but you know how he is. He wont do a thing if you ask him to. And nowweve got him out from underfoot for a while. The darkies are so scared of him they just wont doany work when hes around, breathing down their necks.

Melly, I wouldnt have that old desperado in my house, said Scarlett crossly. She hated Archieas much as he hated her and they barely spoke. Melanies was the only house in which he wouldremain if she were present. And even in Melanies house, he stared at her with suspicion and coldcontempt. Hell cause you trouble, mark my words.

Oh, hes harmless if you flatter him and act like you depend on him, said Melanie. And hesso devoted to Ashley and Beau that I always feel safe having him around.

You mean hes so devoted to you, Melly, said India, her cold face relaxing into a faintly warmsmile as her gaze rested fondly on her sister-in-law. I believe youre the first person that oldruffian has loved since his wifeersince his wife. I think hed really like for somebody to insultyou, so he could kill them to show his respect for you.

Mercy! How you run on, India! said Melanie blushing. He thinks Im a terrible goose andyou know it.

Well, I dont see that what that smelly old hillbilly thinks is of any importance, said Scarlettabruptly. The very thought of how Archie had sat in judgment upon her about the convicts alwaysenraged her. I have to go now. Ive got to go get dinner and then go by the store and pay off theclerks and go by the lumber yard and pay the drivers and Hugh Elsing.

Oh, are you going to the lumber yard? asked Melanie. Ashley is coming in to the yard in thelate afternoon to see Hugh. Can you possibly hold him there till five oclock? If he comes home earlier hell be sure to catch us finishing up a cake or something and then he wont be surprised atall.

Scarlett smiled inwardly, good temper restored.

Yes, Ill hold him, she said.

As she spoke, Indias pale lashless eyes met hers piercingly. She always looks at me so oddlywhen I speak of Ashley, thought Scarlett.

Well, hold him there as long as you can after five oclock, said Melanie. And then India willdrive down and pick him up. ... Scarlett, do come early tonight. I dont want you to miss a minuteof the reception.

As Scarlett rode home she thought sullenly: She doesnt want me to miss a minute of thereception, eh? Well then, why didnt she invite me to receive with her and India and Aunt Pitty?

Generally, Scarlett would not have cared whether she received at Mellys piddling parties or not.

But this was the largest party Melanie had ever given and Ashleys birthday party too, and Scarlettlonged to stand by Ash-leys side and receive with him. But she knew why she had not beeninvited to receive. Even had she not known it, Rhetts comment on the subject had been frankenough.

A Scalawag receive when all die prominent ex-Confederates and Democrats are going to bethere? Your notions are as enchanting as they are muddle headed. Its only because of Miss Mellysloyalty that you are invited at all.

Scarlett dressed with more than usual care that afternoon for her trip to the store and the lumberyard, wearing the new dull-green changeable taffeta frock that looked lilac in some lights and thenew pale-green bonnet, circled about with dark-green plumes. If only Rhett would let her cut bangsand frizzle them on her forehead, how much better this bonnet would look! But he had declaredthat he would shave her whole head if she banged her forelocks. And these days he acted soatrociously he really might do it.

It was a lovely afternoon, sunny but not too hot, bright but not glaring, and the warm breeze thatrustled the trees along Peachtree Street made the plumes on Scarletts bonnet dance. Her heartdanced too, as always when she was going to see Ashley. Perhaps, if she paid off the team driversand Hugh early, they would go home and leave her and Ashley alone in the square little office inthe middle of the lumber yard. Chances to see Ashley alone were all too infrequent these days. Andto think that Melanie had asked her to hold him! That was funny!

Her heart was merry when she reached the store, and she paid off Willie and the other counterboys without even asking what the days business had been. It was Saturday, the biggest day of theweek for the store, for all the farmers came to town to shop that day, but she asked no questions.

Along the way to the lumber yard she stopped a dozen times to speak with Carpetbagger ladiesin splendid equipagesnot so splendid as her own, she thought with pleasureand with manymen who came through the red dust of the street to stand hat in hand and compliment her. It was abeautiful afternoon, she was happy, she looked pretty and her progress was a royal one. Because ofthese delays she arrived at the lumber yard later than she intended and found Hugh and the team drivers sitting on a low pile of lumber waiting for her.

Is Ashley here?

Yes, hes in the office, said Hugh, the habitually worried expression leaving his face at thesight of her happy, dancing eyes. Hes trying toI mean, hes going over the books.

Oh, he neednt bother about that today, she said and then lowering her voice: Melly sent medown to keep him here till they get the house straight for the reception tonight.

Hugh smiled for he was going to the reception. He liked parties and he guessed Scarlett did toofrom the way she looked this afternoon. She paid off the teamsters and Hugh and, abruptly leavingthem, walked toward the office, showing plainly by her manner that she did not care to beaccompanied. Ashley met her at the door and stood in the afternoon sunshine, his hair bright andon his lips a little smile that was almost a grin.

Why, Scarlett, what are you doing downtown this time of the day? Why arent you out at myhouse helping Melly get ready for the surprise party?

Why, Ashley Wilkes! she cried indignantly. You werent supposed to know a thing about it.

Melly will be so disappointed if you arent surprised.

Oh, I wont let on. Ill be the most surprised man in Atlanta, said Ashley, his eyes laughing.

Now, who was mean enough to tell you?

Practically every man Melly invited. General Gordon was the first. He said it had been hisexperience that when women gave surprise parties they usually gave them on the very nights menhad decided to polish and clean all the guns in the house. And then Grandpa Merriwether warnedme. He said Mrs. Merriwether gave him a surprise party once and she was the most surprisedperson there, because Grandpa had been treating his rheumatism, on the sly, with a bottle ofwhisky and he was too drunk to get out of bed andoh, every man whos ever had a surprise partygiven him told me.

The mean things! cried Scarlett but she had to smile.

He looked like the old Ashley she knew at Twelve Oaks when he smiled like this. And he smiledso seldom these days. The air was so soft, the sun so gentle, Ashleys face so gay, his talk sounconstrained that her heart leaped with happiness. It swelled in her bosom until it positivelyached with pleasure, ached as with a burden of joyful, hot, unshed tears. Suddenly she felt sixteenagain and happy, a little breathless and excited. She had a mad impulse to snatch off her bonnetand toss it into the air and cry Hurray! Then she thought how startled Ashley would be if she didthis, and she suddenly laughed, laughed until tears came to her eyes. He laughed, too, throwingback his head as though he enjoyed laughter, thinking her mirth came from the friendly treacheryof the men who had given Mellys secret away.

Come in, Scarlett. Im going over the books.

She passed into the small room, blazing with the afternoon sun, and sat down in the chair beforethe roll-topped desk. Ashley, following her, seated himself on the corner of the rough table, hislong legs dangling easily.

Oh, dont lets fool with any books this afternoon, Ashley! I just cant be bothered. When Imwearing a new bonnet, it seems like all the figures I know leave my head.

Figures are well lost when the bonnets as pretty as that one, he said. Scarlett, you get prettierall the time!

He slipped from the table and, laughing, took her hands, spreading them wide so he could seeher dress. You are so pretty! I dont believe youll ever get old!

At his touch she realized that, without being conscious of it, she had hoped that just this thingwould happen. All this happy afternoon, she had hoped for the warmth of his hands, the tendernessof his eyes, a word that would show he cared. This was the first time they had been utterly alonesince the cold day in the orchard at Tara, the first time their hands had met in any but formalgestures, and through the long months she had hungered for closer contact. But nowHow odd that the touch of his hands did not excite her! Once his very nearness would have sether a-tremble. Now she felt a curious warm friendliness and content. No fever leaped from hishands to hers and in his hands her heart hushed to happy quietness. This puzzled her, made her alittle disconcerted. He was still her Ashley, still her bright, shining darling and she loved him betterthan life. Then whyBut she pushed the thought from her mind. It was enough that she was with him and he washolding her hands and smiling, completely friendly, without strain or fever. It seemed miraculousthat this could be when she thought of all the unsaid things that lay between them. His eyes lookedinto hers, clear and shining, smiling in the old way she loved, smiling as though there had neverbeen anything between them but happiness. There was no barrier between his eyes and hers now,no baffling remoteness. She laughed.

Oh, Ashley, Im getting old and decrepit.

Ah, thats very apparent! No, Scarlett, when you are sixty, youll look the same to me. Illalways remember you as you were that day of our last barbecue, sitting under an oak with a dozenboys around you. I can even tell you just how you were dressed, in a white dress covered with tinygreen flowers and a white lace shawl about your shoulders. You had on little green slippers withblack lacings and an enormous leghorn hat with long green streamers. I know that dress by heartbecause when I was in prison and things got too bad, Id take out my memories and thumb themover like pictures, recalling every little detail

He stopped abruptly and the eager light faded from his face. He dropped her hands gently andshe sat waiting, waiting for his next words.

Weve come a long way, both of us, since that day, havent we, Scarlett? Weve traveled roadswe never expected to travel. Youve come swiftly, directly, and I, slowly and reluctantly.

He sat down on the table again and looked at her and a small smile crept back into his face. Butit was not the smile that had made her so happy so short a while before. It was a bleak smile.

Yes, you came swiftly, dragging me at your chariot wheels. Scarlett, sometimes I have animpersonal curiosity as to what would have happened to me without you.

Scarlett went quickly to defend him from himself, more quickly because treacherously there rose to her mind Rhetts words on this same subject,But Ive never done anything for you, Ashley. Without me, youd have been just the same.

Some day, youd have been a rich man, a great man like you are going to be.

No, Scarlett, the seeds of greatness were never in me. I think that if it hadnt been for you, Idhave gone down into oblivionlike poor Cathleen Calvert and so many other people who oncehad great names, old names.

Oh, Ashley, dont talk like that. You sound so sad.

No, Im not sad. Not any longer. Onceonce I was sad. Now, Im only

He stopped and suddenly she knew what he was thinking. It was the first time she had everknown what Ashley was thinking when his eyes went past her, crystal clear, absent When the furyof love had beaten in her heart, his mind had been closed to her. Now, in the quiet friendliness thatlay between them, she could walk a little way into his mind, understand a little. He was not sad anylonger. He had been sad after the surrender, sad when she begged him to come to Atlanta. Now, hewas only resigned.

I hate to hear you talk like that, Ashley, she said vehemently. You sound just like Rhett. Hesalways harping on things like that and something he calls the survival of the fitting till Im sobored I could scream.

Ashley smiled.

Did you ever stop to think, Scarlett, that Rhett and I are fundamentally alike?

Oh, no! You are so fine, so honorable and he She broke off, confused.

But we are. We came of the same kind of people, we were raised in the same pattern, broughtup to think the same things. And somewhere along the road we took different turnings. We stillthink alike but we react differently. As, for instance, neither of us believed in the war but I enlistedand fought and he stayed out till nearly the end. We both knew the war was all wrong. We bothknew it was a losing fight, I was willing to fight a losing fight. He wasnt. Sometimes I think hewas right and then, again

Oh, Ashley, when will you stop seeing both sides of questions? she asked. But she did notspeak impatiently as she once would have done. No one ever gets anywhere seeing both sides.

Thats true butScarlett, just where do you want to get? Ive often wondered. You see, I neverwanted to get anywhere at all. Ive only wanted to be myself.

Where did she want to get? That was a silly question. Money and security, of course. And yetHer mind fumbled. She had money and as much security as one could hope for in an insecureworld. But, now that she thought about it, they werent quite enough. Now that she thought aboutit, they hadnt made her particularly happy, though they made her less harried, less fearful of themorrow. If Id had money and security and you, that would have been where I wanted to get, shethought, looking at him yearningly. But she did not speak the words, fearful of breaking the spellthat lay between them, fearful that his mind would close against her.

You only want to be yourself? she laughed, a little ruefully. Not being myself has always been my hardest trouble! As to where I want to get, well, I guess Ive gotten there. I wanted to berich and safe and

But, Scarlett, did it ever occur to you that I dont care whether Im rich or not?

No, it had never occurred to her that anyone would not want to be rich.

Then, what do you want?

I dont know, now. I knew once but Ive half forgotten. Mostly to be left alone, not to beharried by people I dont like, driven to do things I dont want to do. PerhapsI want the old daysback again and theyll never come back, and I am haunted by the memory of them and of theworld falling about my ears.

Scarlett set her mouth obstinately. It was not that she did not know what he meant. The verytones of his voice called up other days as nothing else could, made her heart hurt suddenly, as shetoo remembered. But since the day she had lain sick and desolate in the garden at Twelve Oaks andsaid: I wont look back, she had set her face against the past.

I like these days better, she said. But she did not meet his eyes as she spoke. Theres alwayssomething exciting happening now, parties and so on. Everythings got a glitter to it. The old dayswere so dull. (Oh, lazy days and warm still country twilights! The high soft laughter from thequarters! The golden warmth life had then and the comforting knowledge of what all tomorrowswould bring! How can I deny you?)I like these days better, she said but her voice was tremulous.

He slipped from the table, laughing softly in unbelief. Putting his hand under her chin, he turnedher face up to his.

Ah, Scarlett, what a poor liar you are! Yes, life has a glitter nowof a sort Thats whats wrongwith it. The old days had no glitter but they had a charm, a beauty, a slow-paced glamour.

Her mind pulled two ways, she dropped her eyes. The sound of his voice, the touch of his handwere softly unlocking doors that she had locked forever. Behind those doors lay the beauty of theold days, and a sad hunger for them welled up within her. But she knew that no matter what beautylay behind, it must remain there. No one could go forward with a load of aching memories.

His hand dropped from her chin and he took one of her hands between his two and held itgently.

Do you remember, he saidand a warning bell in her mind rang: Dont look back! Dont lookback!

But she swiftly disregarded it, swept forward tide of happiness. At last she was understandinghim,atlasttheirmindshadmet.Thismom(on) en(a) t was too precious to be lost, no matterwhat pain came after.

Do you remember, he said and under the spell of his voice the bare walls of thelittle officefaded and the years rolled aside and they were riding country bridle paths together in a long-gonespring. As he spoke, his light grip tightened on her hand and in his voice was the sad magic of oldhalf-forgotten songs. She could hear the gay jingle of bridle bits as they rode under the dogwood trees to the Tarletons picnic, hear her own careless laughter, see the sun glinting on his silver-gilthair and note the proud easy grace with which he sat his horse. There was music in his voice, themusic of fiddles and banjos to which they had danced in the white house that was no more. Therewas the far-off yelping of possum dogs in the dark swamp under cool autumn moons and the smellof eggnog bowls, wreathed with holly at Christmas time and smiles on black and white faces. Andold friends came trooping back, laughing as though they had not been dead these many years:

Stuart and Brent with their long legs and their red hair and their practical jokes, Tom and Boyd aswild as young horses, Joe Fontaine with his hot black eyes, and Cade and Raiford Calvert whomoved with such languid grace. There was John Wilkes, too; and Gerald, red with brandy; and awhisper and a fragrance that was Ellen. Over it all rested a sense of security, a knowledge that tomorrowcould only bring the same happiness today had brought.

His voice stopped and they looked for a long quiet moment into each others eyes and betweenthem lay the sunny lost youth that they had so unthinkingly shared.

Now I know why you cant be happy, she thought sadly. I never understood before. I neverunderstood before why I wasnt altogether happy either. Butwhy, we are talking like old peopletalk! she thought with dreary surprise. Old people looking back fifty years. And were not old!

Its just that so much has happened in between. Everythings changed so much that it seems likefifty years ago. But were not old!

But when she looked at Ashley he was no longer young and shining. His head was bowed as helooked down absently at her hand which he still held and she saw that his once bright hair was verygray, silver gray as moonlight on still water. Somehow the bright beauty had gone from the Aprilafternoon and from her heart as well and the sad sweetness of remembering was as bitter as gall.

I shouldnt have let him make me look back, she thought despairingly. I was right when Isaid Id never look back. It hurts too much, it drags at your heart till you cant ever do anythingelse except look back. Thats whats wrong with Ashley. He cant look forward any more. He cantsee the present, he fears the future, and so he looks back. I never understood it before. I neverunderstood Ashley before. Oh, Ashley, my darling, you shouldnt look back! What good will it do?

I shouldnt have let you tempt me into talking of the old days. This is what happens when you lookback to happiness, this pain, this heartbreak, this discontent.

She rose to her feet, her hand still in his. She must go. She could not stay and think of the olddays and see his face, tired and sad and bleak as it now was.

Weve come a long way since those days, Ashley, she said, trying to steady her voice, tryingto fight the constriction in her throat. We had fine notions then, didnt we? And then, with a rush,Oh, Ashley, nothing has turned out as we expected!

It never does, he said. Lifes under no obligation to give us what we expect. We take what weget and are thankful its no worse than it is.

Her heart was suddenly dull with pain, with weariness, as she thought of the long road she hadcome since those days. There rose up in her mind the memory of Scarlett OHara who loved beauxand pretty dresses and who intended, some day, when she had the time, to be a great lady likeEllen.

Without warning, tears started in her eyes and rolled slowly down her cheeks and she stoodlooking at him dumbly, like a hurt bewildered child. He said no word but took her gently in hisarms, pressed her head against his shoulder and, leaning down, laid his cheek against hers. Sherelaxed against him and her arms went round his body. The comfort of his arms helped dry hersudden tears. Ah, it was good to be in his arms, without passion, without tenseness, to be there as aloved friend. Only Ashley who shared her memories and her youth, who knew her beginnings andher present could understand.

She heard the sound of feet outside but paid little heed, thinking it was the teamsters goinghome. She stood for a moment, listening to the slow beat of Ashleys heart. Then suddenly hewrenched himself from her, confusing her by his violence. She looked up into his face in surprisebut he was not looking at her. He was looking over her shoulder at the door.

She turned and there stood India, white faced, her pale eyes blazing, and Archie, malevolent as aone-eyed parrot. Behind them stood Mrs. Elsing.

How she got out of the office she never remembered. But she went instantly, swiftly, byAshleys order, leaving Ashley and Archie in grim converse in the little room and India and Mrs.

Elsing outside with their backs to her. Shame and fear sped her homeward and, in her mind, Archiewith his patriarchs beard assumed the proportions of an avenging angel straight from the pages ofthe Old Testament.

The house was empty and still in the April sunset. All the servants had gone to a funeral and thechildren were playing in Melanies back yard. MelanieMelanie! Scarlett went cold at the thought of her as she climbed the stairs to her room. Melaniewould hear of this. India had said she would tell her. Oh, India would glory in telling her, notcaring if she blackened Ashleys name, not caring if she hurt Melanie, if by so doing she couldinjure Scarlett! And Mrs. Elsing would talk too, even though she had really seen nothing, becauseshe was behind India and Archie in the door of the lumber office. But she would talk, just thesame. The news would be all over town by supper time. Everyone, even the negroes, would knowby tomorrows breakfast. At the party tonight, women would gather in corners and whisperdiscreetly and with malicious pleasure. Scarlett Butler rumbled from her high and mighty place!

And the story would grow and grow. There was no way of stopping it. It wouldnt stop at the barefacts, that Ashley was holding her in his arms while she cried. Before nightfall people would besaying she had been taken in adultery. And it had been so innocent, so sweet! Scarlett thoughtwildly: If we had been caught that Christmas of his furlough when I kissed him good-byif wehad been caught in the orchard at Tara when I begged him to run away with meoh, if wed beencaught any of the times when we were really guilty, it wouldnt be so bad! But now! Now! When Iwent to his arms as a friendBut no one would believe that. She wouldnt have a single friend to take her part, not a singlevoice would be raised to say: I dont believe she was doing anything wrong. She had outragedold friends too long to find a champion among them now. Her new friends, suffering in silenceunder her insolences, would welcome a chance to blackguard her. No, everybody would believeanything about her, though they might regret that so fine a man as Ashley Wilkes was mixed up in so dirty an affair. As usual they would cast the blame upon the woman and shrug at the mans guilt.

And in this case they would be right. She had gone into his arms.

Oh, she could stand the cuts, the slights, the covert smiles, anything the town might say, if shehad to stand thembut not Melanie! Oh, not Melanie! She did not know why she should mindMelanie knowing, more than anyone else. She was too frightened and weighed down by a sense ofpast guilt to try to understand it. But she burst into tears at the thought of what would be inMelanies eyes when India told her that she had caught Ashley fondling Scarlett. And what wouldMelanie do when she knew? Leave Ashley? What else could she do, with any dignity? And whatwill Ashley and I do then? she thought frenziedly, the tears streaming down her face. Oh, Ashleywill die of shame and hate me for bringing this on him. Suddenly her tears stopped short as adeadly fear went through her heart. What of Rhett? What would he do?

Perhaps hed never know. What was that old saying, that cynical saying? The husband isalways the last to find out. Perhaps no one would tell him. It would take a brave man to breaksuch news to Rhett, for Rhett had the reputation for shooting first and asking questions afterwards.

Please, God, dont let anybody be brave enough to tell him! But she remembered the face ofArchie in the lumber office, the cold, pale eye, remorseless, full of hate for her and all women.

Archie feared neither God nor man and he hated loose women. He had hated them enough to killone. And he had said he would tell Rhett. And hed tell him in spite of all Ashley could do to dissuadehim. Unless Ashley killed him, Archie would tell Rhett, feeling it his Christian duty.

She pulled off her clothes and lay down on the bed, her mind whirling round and round. If shecould only lock her door and stay in this safe place forever and ever and never see anyone again.

Perhaps Rhett wouldnt find out tonight. Shed say she had a headache and didnt feel like going tothe reception. By morning she would have thought up some excuse to offer, some defense thatmight hold water.

I wont think of it now, she said desperately, burying her face in the pillow. I wont think of itnow. Ill think of it later when I can stand it.

She heard the servants come back as night fell and it seemed to her that they were very silent asthey moved about preparing supper. Or was it her guilty conscience? Mammy came to the door andknocked but Scarlett sent her away, saying she did not want any supper. Time passed and finallyshe heard Rhett coming up the steps. She held herself tensely as he reached the upper hall,gathered all her strength for a meeting but he passed into his room. She breathed easier. He hadntheard. Thank God, he still respected her icy request that he never put foot in her bedroom again,for if he saw her now, her face would give her away. She must gather herself together enough totell him that she felt too ill to go to the reception. Well, there was time enough for her to calmherself. Or was there time? Since the awful moment that afternoon, life had seemed timeless. Sheheard Rhett moving about in his room for a long time, speaking occasionally to Pork. Still shecould not find courage to call to him. She lay still on the bed in the darkness, shaking.

After a long time, he knocked on her door and she said, trying to control her voice: Come in.

Am I actually being invited into the sanctuary? he questioned, opening the door. It was darkand she could not see his face. Nor could she make anything of his voice. He entered and closedthe door.

Are you ready for the reception?

Im so sorry but I have a headache. How odd that her voice sounded natural! Thank God forthe dark! I dont believe Ill go. You go, Rhett, and give Melanie my regrets.

There was a long pause and he spoke drawlingly, bitingly in the dark.

What a white livered, cowardly little bitch you are.

He knew! She lay shaking, unable to speak. She heard him fumble in the dark, strike a matchand the room sprang into light. He walked over to the bed and looked down at her. She saw that hewas in evening clothes.

Get up, he said and there was nothing in his voice. We are going to the reception. You willhave to hurry.

Oh, Rhett, I cant. You see

I can see. Get up.

Rhett, did Archie dare

Archie dared. A very brave man, Archie.

You should have killed him for telling lies

I have a strange way of not killing people who tell the truth. Theres no time to argue now. Getup.

She sat up, hugging her wrapper close to her, her eyes searching his face. It was dark andimpassive.

I wont go, Rhett I cant until thismisunderstanding is cleared up.

If you dont show your face tonight, youll never be able to show it in this town as long as youlive. And while I may endure a trollop for a wife, I wont endure a coward. You are going tonight,even if everyone, from Alex Stephens down, cuts you and Mrs. Wilkes asks us to leave the house.

Rhett, let me explain.

I dont want to hear. There isnt time. Get on your clothes.

They misunderstoodIndia and Mrs. Elsing and Archie. And they hate me so. India hates meso much that shed even tell lies about her own brother to make me appear in a bad light. If youllonly let me explain

Oh, Mother of God, she thought in agony, suppose he says: Pray do explain! What can I say?

How can I explain?

Theyll have told everybody lies. I cant go tonight.

You will go, he said, if I have to drag you by the neck and plant my boot on your ever socharming bottom every step of the way.

There was a cold glitter in his eyes as he jerked her to her feet He picked up her stays and threwthem at her.

Put them on. Ill lace you. Oh yes, I know all about lacing. No, I wont call Mammy to helpyou and have you lock the door and skulk here like the coward you are.

Im not a coward, she cried, stung out of her fear.

Oh, spare me your saga about shooting Yankees and facing Shermans army. Youre a cowardamong other things. If not for your own sake, you are going tonight for Bonnies sake. Howcould you further ruin her chances? Put on your stays, quick.

Hastily she slipped off her wrapper and stood clad only in her chemise. If only he would look ather and see how nice she looked in her chemise, perhaps that frightening look would leave hisface. After all, he hadnt seen her in her chemise for ever and ever so long. But he did not look. Hewas in her closet, going through her dresses swiftly. He fumbled and drew out her new jade-greenwatered-silk dress. It was cut low over the bosom and the skirt was draped back over an enormousbustle and on the bustle was a huge bunch of pink velvet roses.

Wear that, he said, tossing it on the bed and coming toward her. No modest, matronly dovegrays and lilacs tonight. Your flag must be nailed to the mast, for obviously youd run it down if itwasnt. And plenty of rouge. Im sure the woman the Pharisees took in adultery didnt look half sopale. Turn around.

He took the strings of the stays in his hands and jerked them so hard that she cried out,frightened, humiliated, embarrassed at such an untoward performance.

Hurts, does it? He laughed shortly and she could not see his face. Pity it isnt around yourneck.

Melanies house blazed lights from every room and they could hear the music far up the street.

As they drew up in front, the pleasant exciting sounds of many people enjoying themselves floatedout. The house was packed with guests. They overflowed on verandas and many were sitting onbenches in the dim lantern-hung yard.

I cant go inI cant, thought Scarlett, sitting in the carriage, gripping her balled-uphandkerchief. I cant. I wont. I will jump out and run away, somewhere, back home to Tara, Whydid Rhett force me to come here? What will people do? What will Melanie do? What will she looklike? Oh, I cant face her. I will run away.

As though he read her mind, Rhetts hand closed upon her arm in a grip that would leave abruise, the rough grip of a careless stranger.

Ive never known an Irishman to be a coward. Wheres your much-vaunted courage?

Rhett, do please, let me go home and explain.

You have eternity in which to explain and only one night to be a martyr in the amphitheater.

Get out, darling, and let me see the lions eat you. Get out.

She went up the walk somehow, the arm she was holding as hard and steady as granite,communicating to her some courage. By God, she could face them and she would. What were theybut a bunch of howling, clawing cats who were jealous of her? Shed show them. She didnt carewhat they thought. Only Melanieonly Melanie.

They were on the porch and Rhett was bowing right and left, his hat in his hand, his voice cooland soft. The music stopped as they entered and the crowd of people seemed to her confused mindto surge up to her like the roar of the sea and then ebb away, with lessening, ever-lessening sound.

Was everyone going to cut her? Well, Gods nightgown, let them do it! Her chin went up and shesmiled, the corners of her eyes crinkling.

Before she could turn to speak to those nearest the door, someone came through the press ofpeople. There was an odd hush that caught Scarletts heart. Then through the lane came Melanie onsmall feet that hurried, hurried to meet Scarlett at the door, to speak to her before anyone elsecould speak. Her narrow shoulders were squared and her small jaw set indignantly and, for all hernotice, she might have had no other guest but Scarlett. She went to her side and slipped an armabout her waist.

What a lovely dress, darling, she said in her small, clear voice. Will you be an angel? Indiawas unable to come tonight and assist me. Will you receive with me?

Chapter 54

SAFE IN HER ROOM AGAIN, Scarlett fell on the bed, careless of her moir dress, bustle androses. For a time she could only lie still and think of standing between Melanie and Ashley,greeting guests. What a horror! She would face Shermans army again rather than repeat thatperformance! After a time, she rose from the bed and nervously paced the floor, shedding garmentsas she walked.

Reaction from strain set in and she began to shake. Hairpins slipped out of her fingers andtinkled to the floor and when she tried to give her hair its customary hundred strokes, she bangedthe back of the brush hurtingly against her temple. A dozen times she tiptoed to the door to listenfor noises downstairs but the hall below lay like a black silent pit.

Rhett had sent her home alone in the carriage when the party was over and she had thanked Godfor the reprieve. He had not come in yet Thank God, he had not come in. She could not face himtonight, shamed, frightened, shaking. But where was he? Probably at that creatures place. For thefirst time, Scarlett was glad there was such a person as Belle Watling. Glad there was some otherplace than this house to shelter Rhett until his glittering, murderous mood had passed. That waswrong, being glad a husband was at the house of a prostitute, but she could not help it. She wouldbe almost glad if he were dead, if it meant she would not have to see him tonight.

Tomorrowwell, tomorrow was another day. Tomorrow she would think of some excuse, somecounter accusations, some way of putting Rhett in the wrong. Tomorrow the memory of thishideous night would not be driving her so fiercely that she shook. Tomorrow she would not be sohaunted by the memory of Ashleys face, his broken pride and his shameshame that she hadcaused, shame in which he had so little part. Would he hate her now, her darling honorable Ashley,because she had shamed him? Of course he would hate her nownow that they had both beensaved by the indignant squaring of Melanies thin shoulders and the love and outspoken trustwhich had been in her voice as she crossed the glassy floor to slip her arm through Scarletts andface the curious, malicious, covertly hostile crowd. How neatly Melanie had scotched the scandal, keeping Scarlett at her side all through the dreadful evening! People had been a bit cool, somewhatbewildered, but they had been polite.

Oh, the ignominy of it all, to be sheltered behind Melanies skirts from those who hated her, whowould have torn her to bits with their whispers! To be sheltered by Melanies blind trust, Melanieof all people!

Scarlett shook as with a chill at the thought. She must have a drink, a number of drinks beforeshe could lie down and hope to sleep. She threw a wrapper about her gown and went hastily outinto the dark hall, her backless slippers making a great clatter in the stillness. She was halfwaydown the stairs before she looked toward the closed door of the dining room and saw a narrow lineof light streaming from under it. Her heart stopped for a moment Had that light been burning whenshe came home and had she been too upset to notice it? Or was Rhett home after all? He couldhave come in quietly through the kitchen door. If Rhett were home, she would tiptoe back to bedwithout her brandy, much as she needed it. Then she wouldnt have to face him. Once in her roomshe would be safe, for she could lock the door.

She was leaning over to pluck off her slippers, so she might hurry back in silence, when thedining-room door swung open abruptly and Rhett stood silhouetted against the dim candlelightbehind him. He looked huge, larger than she had ever seen him, a terrifying faceless black bulkthat swayed slightly on its feet.

Pray join me, Mrs. Butler, he said and his voice was a little thick.

He was drunk and showing it and she had never before seen him show his liquor, no matter howmuch he drank. She paused irresolutely, saying nothing and his arm went up in gesture ofcommand.

Come here, damn you! he said roughly.

He must be very drunk, she thought with a fluttering heart. Usually, the more he drank, the morepolished became his manners. He sneered more, his words were apt to be more biting, but themanner that accompanied them was always punctilioustoo punctilious.

I must never let him know Im afraid to face him, she thought, and, clutching the wrappercloser to her throat she went down the stairs with her head up and her heels clacking noisily.

He stood aside and bowed her through the door with a mockery that made her wince. She sawthat he was coat-less and his cravat hung down on either side of his open collar. His shirt was opendown to the thick mat of black hair on his chest. His hair was rumpled and his eyes bloodshot andnarrow. One candle burned on the table, a tiny spark of light that threw monstrous shadows aboutthe high-ceilinged room and made the massive sideboards and buffet look like still, crouchingbeasts. On the table on the silver tray stood the decanter with cut-glass stopper out, surrounded byglasses.

Sit down, he said curtly, following her into the room.

Now a new kind of fear crept into her, a fear that made her alarm at facing him seem very small.

He looked and talked and acted like a stranger. This was an ill-mannered Rhett she had never seenbefore. Never at any time, even in most intimate moments, had he been other than nonchalant.

Even in anger, he was suave and satirical, and whisky usually served to intensify these qualities. Atfirst it had annoyed her and she had tried to break down that nonchalance but soon she had come toaccept it as a very convenient thing. For years she had thought that nothing mattered very much tohim, that he thought everything in life, including her, an ironic joke. But as she faced him acrossthe table, she knew with a sinking feeling in her stomach that at last something was mattering tohim, mattering very much.

There is no reason why you should not have your nightcap, even if I am ill bred enough to be athome, he said. Shall I pour it for you?

I did not want a drink, she said stiffly. I heard a noise and came

You heard nothing. You wouldnt have come down if youd thought I was home. Ive sat hereand listened to you racing up and down the floor upstairs. You must need a drink badly. Take it.

I do not

He picked up the decanter and sloshed a glassful, untidily.

Take it, he said, shoving it into her hand. You are shaking all over. Oh, dont give yourselfairs. I know you drink on the quiet and I know how much you drink. For some time Ive beenintending to tell you to stop your elaborate pretenses and drink openly if you want to. Do you thinkI give a damn if you like your brandy?

She took the wet glass, silently cursing him. He read her like a book. He had always read herand he was the one man in the world from whom she would like to hide her real thoughts.

Drink it, I say.

She raised the glass and bolted the contents with one abrupt motion of her arm, wrist stiff, justas Gerald had always taken his neat whisky, bolted it before she thought how practiced andunbecoming it looked. He did not miss the gesture and his mouth went down at the corner.

Sit down and we will have a pleasant domestic discussion of the elegant reception we have justattended.

You are drunk, she said coldly, and I am going to bed.

I am very drunk and I intend to get still drunker before the evenings over. But you arent goingto bednot yet. Sit down.

His voice still held a remnant of its wonted cool drawl but beneath the words she could feelviolence fighting its way to the surface, violence as cruel as the crack of a whip. She waveredirresolutely and he was at her side, his hand on her arm in a grip that hurt. He gave it a slightwrench and she hastily sat down with a little cry of pain. Now, she was afraid, more afraid than shehad ever been in her life. As he leaned over her, she saw that his face was dark and flushed and hiseyes still held their frightening glitter. There was something in their depths she did not recognize,could not understand, something deeper than anger, stronger than pain, something driving him untilhis eyes glowed redly like twin coals. He looked down at her for a long time, so long that herdefiant gaze wavered and fell, and then he slumped into a chair opposite her and poured himselfanother drink. She thought rapidly, trying to lay a line of defenses. But until he spoke, she wouldnot know what to say for she did not know exactly what accusation he intended to make.

He drank slowly, watching her over the glass and she tightened her nerves, trying to keep fromtrembling. For a time his face did not change its expression but finally he laughed, still keeping hiseyes on her, and at the sound she could not still her shaking.

It was an amusing comedy, this evening, wasnt it? She said nothing, curling her toes in theloose slippers in an effort at controlling her quivering.

A pleasant comedy with no character missing. The village assembled to stone the erringwoman, the wronged husband supporting his wife as a gentleman should, the wronged wifestepping in with Christian spirit and casting the garments of her spotless reputation over it all. Andthe lover

Please.

I dont please. Not tonight. Its too amusing. And the lover looking like a damned fool andwishing he were dead. How does it feel, my dear, to have the woman you hate stand by you andcloak your sins for you? Sit down.

She sat down.

You dont like her any better for it, I imagine. You are wondering if she knows all about youand Ashleywondering why she did this if she does knowif she just did it to save her own face.

And you are thinking shes a fool for doing it, even if it did save your hide but

I will not listen

Yes, you will listen. And Ill tell you this to ease your worry. Miss Melly is a fool but not thekind you think. It was obvious that someone had told her but she didnt believe it. Even if she saw,she wouldnt believe. Theres too much honor in her to conceive of dishonor in anyone she loves. Idont know what lie Ashley Wilkes told herbut any clumsy one would do, for she loves Ashleyand she loves you. Im sure I cant see why she loves you but she does. Let that be one of yourcrosses.

If you were not so drunk and insulting, I would explain everything, said Scarlett, recoveringsome dignity. But now

I am not interested in your explanations. I know the truth better than you do. By God, if you getup out of that chair just once moreAnd what I find more amusing than even tonights comedy is the fact that while you have beenso virtuously denying me the pleasures of your bed because of my many sins, you have beenlusting in your heart after Ashley Wilkes. Lusting in your heart. Thats a good phrase, isnt it?

There are a number of good phrases, in that Book, arent there?

What book? What book? her mind ran on, foolishly, irrelevantly as she cast frantic eyes aboutthe room, noting how dully the massive silver gleamed in the dim light, how frighteningly dark thecorners were.

And I was cast out because my coarse ardors were too much for your refinementbecause youdidnt want any more children. How bad that made me feel, dear heart! How it cut me! So I wentout and found pleasant consolation and left you to your refinements. And you spent that timetracking the long-suffering Mr. Wilkes. God damn him, what ails him? He cant be faithful to his wife with his mind or unfaithful with his body. Why doesnt he make up his mind? You wouldntobject to having his children, would youand passing them off as mine?

She sprang to her feet with a cry and he lunged from his seat, laughing that soft laugh that madeher blood cold. He pressed her back into her chair with large brown hands and leaned over her.

Observe my hands, my dear, he said, flexing them before her eyes. I could tear you to pieceswith them with no trouble whatsoever and I would do it if it would take Ashley out of your mind.

But it wouldnt. So I think Ill remove him from your mind forever, this way. Ill put my hands, so,on each side of your head and Ill smash your skull between them like a walnut and that will blothim out.

His hands were on her head, under her flowing hair, caressing, hard, turning her face up to his.

She was looking into the face of a stranger, a drunken drawling-voiced stranger. She had neverlacked animal courage and in the face of danger it flooded back hotly into her veins, stiffening herspine, narrowing her eyes.

You drunken fool, she said. Take your hands off me.

To her surprise, he did so and seating himself on the edge of the table he poured himself anotherdrink.

I have always admired your spirit, my dear. Never more than now when you are cornered.

She drew her wrapper close about her body. Oh, if she could only reach her room and turn thekey in the stout door and be alone. Somehow, she must stand him off, bully him into submission,this Rhett she had never seen before. She rose without haste, though her knees shook, tightened thewrapper across her hips and threw back her hair from her face.

Im not cornered, she said cuttingly. Youll never corner me, Rhett Butler, or frighten me.

You are nothing but a drunken beast whos been with bad women so long that you cant understandanything else but badness. You cant understand Ashley or me. Youve lived in dirt too long toknow anything else. You are jealous of something you cant understand. Good night.

She turned casually and started toward the door and a burst of laughter stopped her. She turnedand he swayed across the room toward her. Name of God, if he would only stop that terrible laugh!

What was there to laugh about in all of this? As he came toward her, she backed toward the doorand found herself against the wall. He put his hands heavily upon her and pinned her shoulders tothe wall.

Stop laughing.

I am laughing because I am so sorry for you.

Sorryfor me? Be sorry for yourself.

Yes, by God, Im sorry for you, my dear, my pretty little fool. That hurts, doesnt it? You cantstand either laughter or pity, can you?

He stopped laughing, leaning so heavily against her shoulders that they ached. His face changedand he leaned so close to her that the heavy whisky smell of his breath made her turn her head.

Jealous, am I? he said. And why not? Oh, yes, Im jealous of Ashley Wilkes. Why not? Oh, dont try to talk and explain. I know youve been physically faithful to me. Was that what you weretrying to say? Oh, Ive known that all along. All these years. How do I know? Oh, well, I knowAshley Wilkes and his breed. I know he is honorable and a gentleman. And that my dear, is morethan I can say for youor for me, for that matter. We are not gentlemen and we have no honor,have we? Thats why we flourish like green bay trees.

Let me go. I wont stand here and be insulted.

Im not insulting you. Im praising your physical virtue. And it hasnt fooled me one bit. Youthink men are such fools, Scarlett. It never pays to underestimate your opponents strength andintelligence. And Im not a fool. Dont you suppose I know that youve lain in my arms andpretended I was Ashley Wilkes?

Her jaw dropped and fear and astonishment were written plainly in her face.

Pleasant thing, that. Rather ghostly, in fact. Like having three in a bed where there ought to bejust two. He shook her shoulders, ever so slightly, hiccoughed and smiled mockingly.

Oh, yes, youve been faithful to me because Ashley wouldnt have you. But, hell, I wouldnthave grudged him your body. I know how little bodies meanespecially womens bodies. But I dogrudge him your heart and your dear, hard, unscrupulous, stubborn mind. He doesnt want yourmind, the fool, and I dont want your body. I can buy women cheap. But I do want your mind andyour heart, and Ill never have them, any more than youll ever have Ashleys mind. And thatswhy Im sorry for you.

Even through her fear and bewilderment, his sneer stung.

Sorryfor me?

Yes, sorry because youre such a child, Scarlett. A child crying for the moon. What would achild do with the moon if it got it? And what would you do with Ashley? Yes, Im sorry for yousorry to see you throwing away happiness with both hands and reaching out for something thatwould never make you happy. Im sorry because you are such a fool you dont know there cantever be happiness except when like mates like. If I were dead, if Miss Melly were dead and youhad your precious honorable lover, do you think youd be happy with him? Hell, no! You wouldnever know him, never know what he was thinking about, never understand him any more thanyou understand music and poetry and books or anything that isnt dollars and cents. Whereas, we,dear wife of my bosom, could have been perfectly happy if you had ever given us half a chance,for we are so much alike. We are both scoundrels, Scarlett, and nothing is beyond us when wewant something. We could have been happy, for I loved you and I know you, Scarlett, down toyour bones, in a way that Ashley could never know you. And he would despise you if he did know.

... But no, you must go mooning all your life after a man you cannot understand. And I, mydarling, will continue to moon after whores. And, I dare say well do better than most couples.

He released her abruptly and made a weaving way back toward the decanter. For a moment,Scarlett stood rooted, thoughts tearing in and out of her mind so swiftly that she could seize noneof them long enough to examine them. Rhett had said he loved her. Did he mean it? Or was hemerely drunk? Or was this one of his horrible jokes? And Ashleythe mooncrying for themoon. She ran swiftly into the dark hall, fleeing as though demons were upon her. Oh, if she could only reach her room! She turned her ankle and the slipper fell half off. As she stopped to kick itloose frantically, Rhett, running lightly as an Indian, was beside her in the dark. His breath was noton her face and his hands went round her roughly, under the wrapper, against her bare skin.

You turned me out on the town while you chased him. By God, this is one night when there areonly going to be two in my bed.

He swung her off her feet into his arms and started up the stairs. Her head was crushed againsthis chest and she heard the hard hammering of his heart beneath her ears. He hurt her and she criedout, muffled, frightened. Up the stairs, he went in the utter darkness, up, up, and she was wild withfear. He was a mad stranger and this was a black darkness she did not know, darker than death. Hewas like death, carrying her away in arms that hurt. She screamed, stifled against him and hestopped suddenly on the landing and, turning her swiftly in his arms, bent over and kissed her witha savagery and a completeness that wiped out everything from her mind but the dark into whichshe was sinking and the lips on hers. He was shaking, as though he stood in a strong wind, and hislips, traveling from her mouth downward to where the wrapper had fallen from her body, fell onher soft flesh. He was muttering things she did not hear, his lips were evoking feelings never feltbefore. She was darkness and he was darkness and there had never been anything before this time,only darkness and his lips upon her. She tried to speak and his mouth was over hers again.

Suddenly she had a wild thrill such as she had never known; joy, fear, madness, excitement,surrender to arms that were too strong, lips too bruising, fate that moved too fast For the first timein her life she had met someone, something stronger than she, someone she could neither bully norbreak, someone who was bullying and breaking her. Somehow, her arms were around his neck andher lips trembling beneath his and they were going up, up into the darkness again, a darkness thatwas soft and swirling and all enveloping.

When she awoke the next morning, he was gone and had it not been for the rumpled pillowbeside her, she would have thought the happenings, of the night before a wild preposterous dream.

She went crimson at the memory and, pulling the bed covers up about her neck, lay bathed insunlight, trying to sort out the jumbled impressions in her mind.

Two things stood to the fore. She had lived for years with Rhett, slept with him, eaten with him,quarreled with him and borne his childand yet, she did not know him. The man who had carriedher up the dark stairs was a stranger of whose existence she had not dreamed. And now, though shetried to make herself hate him, tried to be indignant, she could not. He had humbled her, hurt her,used her brutally through a wild mad night and she had gloried in it.

Oh, she should be ashamed, should shrink from the very memory of the hot swirling darkness! Alady, a real lady, could never hold up her head after such a night. But, stronger than shame, was thememory of rapture, of the ecstasy of surrender. For the first time in her life she had felt alive, feltpassion as sweeping and primitive as the fear she had known the night she fled Atlanta, as dizzysweet as the cold hate when she had shot the Yankee.

Rhett loved her! At least, he said he loved her and how could she doubt it now? How odd andbewildering and how incredible that he loved her, this savage stranger with whom she had lived insuch coolness. She was not altogether certain how she felt about this revelation but as an idea came to her she suddenly laughed aloud. He loved her and so she had him at last. She had almostforgotten her early desire to entrap him into loving her, so she could hold the whip over hisinsolent black head. Now, it came back and it gave her great satisfaction. For one night, he had hadher at his mercy but now she knew the weakness of his armor. From now on she had him whereshe wanted him. She had smarted under his jeers for. a long time, but now she had him where shecould make him jump through any hoops she cared to hold.

When she thought of meeting him again, face to face in the sober light of day, a nervous tinglingembarrassment that carried with it an exciting pleasure enveloped her.

Im nervous as a bride, she thought. And about Rhett! And, at the idea she fell to gigglingfoolishly.

But Rhett did not appear for dinner, nor was he at his place at the supper table. The night passed,a long night during which she lay awake until dawn, her ears strained to hear his key in the latch.

But he did not come. When the second day passed with no word from him, she was frantic withdisappointment and fear. She went by the bank but he was not there. She went to the store and wasvery sharp with everyone, for every time the door opened to admit a customer she looked up with aflutter, hoping it was Rhett. She went to the lumber yard and bullied Hugh until he hid himselfbehind a pile of lumber. But Rhett did not seek her there.

She could not humble herself to ask friends if they had seen him. She could not make inquiriesamong the servants for news of him. But she felt they knew something she did not know. Negroesalways knew everything. Mammy was unusually silent those two days. She watched Scarlett out ofthe corner of her eye and said nothing. When the second night had passed Scarlett made up hermind to go to the police. Perhaps he had had an accident, perhaps his horse had thrown him and hewas lying helpless in some ditch. Perhapsoh, horrible thoughtperhaps he was dead.

The next morning when she had finished her breakfast and was in her room putting on herbonnet, she heard swift feet on the. stairs. As she sank to the bed in weak thankfulness, Rhettentered the room. He was freshly barbered, shaved and massaged and he was sober, but his eyeswere bloodshot and his face puffy from drink. He waved an airy hand at her and said: Oh, hello.

How could a man say: Oh, hello, after being gone without explanation for two days? Howcould he be so nonchalant with the memory of such a night as they had spent? He couldnt unlessunlessthe terrible thought leaped into her mind. Unless such nights were the usual thing tohim. For a moment she could not speak and all the pretty gestures and smiles she had thought touse upon him were forgotten. He did not even come to her to give her his usual offhand kiss butstood looking at her, with a grin, a smoking cigar in his hand.

Wherewhere have you been?

Dont tell me you dont know! I thought surely the whole town knew by now. Perhaps they alldo, except you. You know the old adage: The wife is always the last one to find out.

What do you mean?

I thought that after the police called at Belles night before last

Bellesthatthat woman! You have been with

Of course. Where else would I be? I hope you havent worried about me.

You went from me tooh!

Come, come, Scarlett! Dont play the deceived wife. You must have known about Belle longago.

You went to her from me, afterafter

Oh, that. He made a careless gesture. I will forget my manners. My apologies for my conductat our last meeting. I was very drunk, as you doubtless know, and quite swept off my feet by yourcharmsneed I enumerate them?

Suddenly she wanted to cry, to lie down on the bed and sob endlessly. He hadnt changed,nothing had changed, and she had been a fool, a stupid, conceited, silly fool, thinking he loved her.

It had all been one of his repulsive drunken jests. He had taken her and used her when he wasdrunk, just as he would use any woman in Belles house. And now he was back, insulting,sardonic, out of reach. She swallowed her tears and rallied. He must never, never know what shehad thought. How he would laugh if he knew! Well, hed never know. She looked up quickly athim and caught that old, puzzling, watchful glint in his eyeskeen, eager as though he hung onher next words, hoping they would bewhat was he hoping? That shed make a fool out of herselfand bawl and give him something to laugh about? Not she! Her slanting brows rushed together in acold frown.

I had naturally suspected what your relations with that creature were.

Only suspected? Why didnt you ask me and satisfy your curiosity? Id have told you. Ivebeen living with her ever since the day you and Ashley Wilkes decided that we should haveseparate bedrooms.

You have the gall to stand there and boast to me, your wife, that

Oh, spare me your moral indignation. You never gave a damn what I did as long as I paid thebills. And you know Ive been no angel recently. And as for you being my wifeyou havent beenmuch of a wife since Bonnie came, have you? Youve been a poor investment, Scarlett. Bellesbeen a better one.

Investment? You mean you gave her?

Set her up in business is the correct term, I believe. Belles a smart woman. I wanted to seeher get ahead and all she needed was money to start a house of her own. You ought to know whatmiracles a woman can perform when she has a bit of cash. Look at yourself.

You compare me

Well, you are both hard-headed business women and both successful. Belles got the edge onyou, of course, because shes a kind-hearted, good-natured soul

Will you get out of this room?

He lounged toward the door, one eyebrow raised quizzically. How could he insult her so, shethought in rage and pain. He was going out of his way to hurt and humiliate her and she writhed asshe thought how she had longed for his homecoming, while all the time he was drunk and brawling with police in a bawdy house.

Get out of this room and dont ever come back in it. I told you that once before and youwerent enough of a gentleman to understand. Hereafter I will lock my door.

Dont bother.

I will lock it After the way you acted the other nightso drunk, so disgusting

Come now, darling! Not disgusting, surely!

Get out.

Dont worry. Im going. And I promise Ill never bother you again. Thats final. And I justthought Id tell you that if my infamous conduct was too much for you to bear, Ill let you have adivorce. Just give me Bonnie and I wont contest it.

I would not think of disgracing the family with a divorce.

Youd disgrace it quick enough if Miss Melly was dead, wouldnt you? It makes my head spinto think how quickly youd divorce me.

Will you go?

Yes, Im going. Thats what I came home to tell you. Im going to Charleston and New Orleansandoh, well, a very extended trip. Im leaving today.

Oh!

And Im taking Bonnie with me. Get that foolish Prissy to pack her little duds. Ill take Prissytoo.

Youll never take my child out of this house.

My child too, Mrs. Butler. Surely you do not mind me taking her to Charleston to see hergrandmother?

Her grandmother, my foot! Do you think Ill let you take that baby out of here when youll bedrunk every night and most likely taking her to houses like that Belles

He threw down the cigar violently and it smoked acridly on the carpet, the smell of scorchingwool rising to their nostrils. In an instant he was across the floor and by her side, his face blackwith fury.

If you were a man, I would break your neck for that. As it is, all I can say is for you to shutyour God-damn mouth. Do you think I do not love Bonnie, that I would take her wheremydaughter! Good God, you fool! And as for you, giving yourself pious airs about your motherhood,why, a cats a better mother than you! What have you ever done for the children? Wade and Ellaare frightened to death of you and if it wasnt for Melanie Wilkes, theyd never know what loveand affection are. But Bonnie, my Bonnie! Do you think I cant take better care of her than you?

Do you think Ill ever let you bully her and break her spirit, as youve broken Wades and Ellas?

Hell, no! Have her packed up and ready for me in an hour or I warn you what happened the othernight will be mild beside what will happen. Ive always thought a good lashing with a buggy whipwould benefit you immensely.

He turned on his heel before she could speak and went out of the room on swift feet. She heardhim cross the floor of the hall to the childrens play room and open the door. There was a glad,quick treble of childish voices and she heard Bonnies tones rise over Ellas.

Daddy, where you been?

Hunting for a rabbits skin to wrap my little Bonnie in. Give your best sweetheart a kiss,Bonnieand you too, Ella.

Chapter 55

DARLING, I dont want any explanation from you and I wont listen to one, said Melaniefirmly as she gently laid a small hand across Scarletts tortured lips and stilled her words. Youinsult yourself and Ashley and me by even thinking there could be need of explanations betweenus. Why, we three have beenhave been like soldiers fighting the world together for so manyyears that Im ashamed of you for thinking idle gossip could come between us. Do you think Idbelieve that you and my Ashley Why, the idea! Dont you realize I know you better than anyonein the world knows you? Do you think Ive forgotten all the wonderful, unselfish things youvedone for Ashley and Beau and meeverything from saving my life to keeping us from starving!

Do you think I could remember you walking in a furrow behind that Yankees horse almostbarefooted and with your hands blisteredjust so the baby and I could have something to eatand then believe such dreadful things about you? I dont want to hear a word out of you, ScarlettOHara. Not a word.

But Scarlett fumbled and stopped.

Rhett had left town the hour before with Bonnie and Prissy, and desolation was added toScarletts shame and anger. The additional burden of her guilt with Ashley and Melanies defensewas more than she could bear. Had Melanie believed India and Archie, cut her at the reception oreven greeted her frigidly, then she could have held her head high and fought back with everyweapon in her armory. But now, with the memory of Melanie standing between her and social ruin,standing like a thin, shining blade, with trust and a fighting light in her eyes, there seemed nothinghonest to do but confess. Yes, blurt out everything from that far-off beginning on the sunny porchat Tara.

She was driven by a conscience which, though long suppressed, could still rise up, an activeCatholic conscience. Confess your sins and do penance for them in sorrow and contrition, Ellenhad told her a hundred times and, in this crisis, Ellens religious training came back and grippedher. She would confessyes, everything, every look and word, those few caressesand then Godwould ease her pain and give her peace. And, for her penance, there would be the dreadful sight ofMelanies face changing from fond love and trust to incredulous horror and repulsion. Oh, that wastoo hard a penance, she thought in anguish, to have to live out her life remembering Melaniesface, knowing that Melanie knew all the pettiness, the meanness, the two-faced disloyalty and thehypocrisy that were in her.

Once, the thought of flinging the truth tauntingly in Melanies face and seeing the collapse ofher fools paradise had been an intoxicating one, a gesture worth everything she might lose thereby. But now, all that had changed overnight and there was nothing she desired less. Why thisshould be she did not know. There was too great a tumult of conflicting ideas in her mind for her tosort them out. She only knew that as she had once desired to keep her mother thinking her modest,kind, pure of heart, so she now passionately desired to keep Melanies high opinion. She onlyknew that she did not care what the world thought of her or what Ashley or Rhett thought of her,but Melanie must not think her other than she had always thought her.

She dreaded to tell Melanie the truth but one of her rare honest instincts arose, an instinct thatwould not let her masquerade in false colors before the woman who had fought her battles for her.

So she had hurried to Melanie that morning, as soon as Rhett and Bonnie had left the house.

But at her first tumbled-out words: Melly, I must explain about the other day Melanie hadimperiously stopped her. Scarlett looking shamefaced into the dark eyes that were flashing withlove and anger, knew with a sinking heart that the peace and calm following confession couldnever be hers. Melanie had forever cut off that line of action by her first words. With one of thefew adult emotions Scarlett had ever had, she realized that to unburden her own tortured heartwould be the purest selfishness. She would be ridding herself of her burden and laying it on theheart of an innocent and trusting person. She owed Melanie a debt for her championship and thatdebt could only be paid with silence. What cruel payment it would be to wreck Melanies life withthe unwelcome knowledge that her husband was unfaithful to her, and her beloved friend a party toit!

I cant tell her, she thought miserably. Never, not even if my conscience kills me. Sheremembered irrelevantly Rhetts drunken remark: She cant conceive of dishonor in anyone sheloves ... let that be your cross.

Yes, it would be her cross, until she died, to keep this torment silent within her, to wear the hairshirt of shame, to feel it chafing her at every tender look and gesture Melanie would makethroughout the years, to subdue forever the impulse to cry: Dont be so kind! Dont fight for me!

Im not worth it!

If you only werent such a fool, such a sweet, trusting, simple-minded fool, it wouldnt be sohard, she thought desperately. Ive toted lots of weary loads but this is going to be the heaviestand most galling load Ive ever toted.

Melanie sat facing her, in a low chair, her feet firmly planted on an ottoman so high that herknees stuck up like a childs, a posture she would never now assumed had not rage possessed herto the point of forgetting proprieties. She held a line of tatting in her hands and she was driving theshining needle back and forth as furiously as though handling a rapier in a duel.

Had Scarlett been possessed of such an anger, she would have been stamping both feet androaring like Gerald in his finest days, calling on God to witness the accursed duplicity andknavishness of mankind and uttering blood-curdling threats of retaliation. But only by the flashingneedle and the delicate brows drawn down toward her nose did Melanie indicate that she wasinwardly seething. Her voice was cool and her words were more close clipped than usual. But theforceful words she uttered were foreign to Melanie who seldom voiced an opinion at all and neveran unkind word. Scarlett realized suddenly that the Wilkeses and the Hamiltons were capable offuries equal to and surpassing those of the OHaras.

Ive gotten mighty tired of hearing people criticize you, darling, Melanie said, and this is thelast straw and Im going to do something about it. All this has happened because people are jealousof you, because you are so smart and successful. Youve succeeded where lots of men, even, havefailed. Now, dont be vexed with me, dear, for saying that. I dont mean youve ever beenunwomanly or un-sexed yourself, as lots of folks have said. Because you havent. People just dontunderstand you and people cant bear for women to be smart. But your smartness and your successdont give people the right to say that you and Ashley Stars above!

The soft vehemence of this last ejaculation would have been, upon a mans lips, profanity of nouncertain meaning. Scarlett stared at her, alarmed by so unprecedented an outburst.

And for them to come to me with the filthy lies theyd concoctedArchie, India, Mrs. Elsing!

How did they dare? Of course, Mrs. Elsing didnt come here. No, indeed, she didnt have thecourage. But shes always hated you, darling, because you were more popular than Fanny. And shewas so incensed at your demoting Hugh from the management of the mill. But you were quite rightin demoting him. Hes just a piddling, do-less, good-for-nothing! Swiftly Melanie dismissed theplaymate of her childhood and the beau of her teen years. I blame myself about Archie. Ishouldnt have given the old scoundrel shelter. Everyone told me so but I wouldnt listen. Hedidnt like you, dear, because of the convicts, but who is he to criticize you? A murderer, and themurderer of a woman, too! And after all Ive done for him, he comes to me and tells me Ishouldnt have been a bit sorry if Ashley had shot him. Well, I packed him off with a large flea inhis ear, I can tell you! And hes left town.

And as for India, the vile thing! Darling, I couldnt help noticing from the first time I saw youtwo together that she was jealous of you and hated you, because you were so much prettier and hadso many beaux. And she hated you especially about Stuart Tarleton. And shes brooded aboutStuart so much thatwell, I hate to say it about Ashleys sister but I think her mind has brokenwith thinking so much! Theres no other explanation for her action. ... I told her never to put foot inthis house again and that if I heard her breathe so vile an insinuation I wouldI would call her aliar in public!

Melanie stopped speaking and abruptly the anger left her face and sorrow swamped it. Melaniehad all that passionate clan loyalty peculiar to Georgians and the thought of a family quarrel toreher heart. She faltered for a moment. But Scarlett was dearest, Scarlett came first in her heart, andshe went on loyally:

Shes always been jealous because I loved you best, dear. Shell never come in this house againand Ill never put foot under any roof that receives her. Ashley agrees with me, but its just aboutbroken his heart that his own sister should tell such a

At the mention of Ashleys name, Scarletts overwrought nerves gave way and she burst intotears. Would she never stop stabbing him to the heart? Her only thought had been to make himhappy and safe but at every turn she seemed to hurt him. She had wrecked his life, broken his prideand self-respect, shattered that inner peace, that calm based on integrity. And now she hadalienated him from the sister he loved so dearly. To save her own reputation and his wifeshappiness, India had to be sacrificed, forced into the light of a lying, half-crazed, jealous old maidIndia who was absolutely justified in every suspicion she had ever harbored and every accusing word she had uttered. Whenever Ashley looked into Indias eyes, he would see the truth shiningthere, truth and reproach and the cold contempt of which the Wilkeses were masters.

Knowing how Ashley valued honor above his life, Scarlett knew he must be writhing. He, likeScarlett, was forced to shelter behind Melanies skirts. While Scarlett realized the necessity for thisand knew that the blame for his false position lay mostly at her own door, stillstill Womanlikeshe would have respected Ashley more, had he shot Archie and admitted everything to Melanieand the world. She knew she was being unfair but she was too miserable to care for such finepoints. Some of Rhetts taunting words of contempt came back to her and she wondered if indeedAshley had played the manly part in this mess. And, for the first time, some of the bright glowwhich had enveloped him since the first day she fell in love with him began to fade imperceptibly.

The tarnish of shame and guilt that enveloped her spread to him as well. Resolutely she tried tofight off this thought but it only made her cry harder.

Dont! Dont! cried Melanie, dropping her tatting and flinging herself onto the sofa anddrawing Scarletts head down onto her shoulder. I shouldnt have talked about it all and distressedyou so. I know how dreadfully you must feel and well never mention it again. No, not to eachother or to anybody. Itll be as though it never happened. But, she added with quiet venom, Imgoing to show India and Mrs. Elsing whats what. They neednt think they can spread lies aboutmy husband and my sister-in-law. Im going to fix it so neither of them can hold up their heads inAtlanta. And anybody who believes them or receives them is my enemy.

Scarlett, looking sorrowfully down the long vista of years to come, knew that she was the causeof a feud that would split the town and the family for generations.

Melanie was as good as her word. She never again mentioned the subject to Scarlett or toAshley. Nor, for that matter, would she discuss it with anyone. She maintained an air of coolindifference that could speedily change to icy formality if anyone even dared hint about the matter.

During the weeks that followed her surprise party, while Rhett was mysteriously absent and thetown in a frenzied state of gossip, excitement and partisanship, she gave no quarter to Scarlettsdetractors, whether they were her old friends or her blood kin. She did not speak, she acted.

She stuck by Scarletts side like a cocklebur. She made Scarlett go to the store and the lumberyard, as usual, every morning and she went with her. She insisted that Scarlett go driving in theafternoons, little though Scarlett wished to expose herself to the eager carious gaze of her fellowtownspeople. And Melanie sat in the carriage beside her. Melanie took her calling with her onformal afternoons, gently forcing her into parlors in which Scarlett had not sat for more than twoyears. And Melanie, with a fierce love-me-love-my-dog look on her face, made converse withastounded hostesses.

She made Scarlett arrive early on these afternoons and remain until the last callers had gone,thereby depriving the ladies of the opportunity for enjoyable group discussion and speculation, amatter which caused some mild indignation. These calls were an especial torment to Scarlett butshe dared not refuse to go with Melanie. She hated to sit amid crowds of women who were secretlywondering if she had been actually taken in adultery. She hated the knowledge that these womenwould not have spoken to her, had it not been that they loved Melanie and did not want to lose her friendship. But Scarlett knew that, having once received her, they could not cut her thereafter.

It was characteristic of the regard in which Scarlett was held that few people based their defenseor their criticism of her on her personal integrity. I wouldnt put much beyond her, was theuniversal attitude. Scarlett had made too many enemies to have many champions now. Her wordsand her actions rankled in too many hearts for many people to care whether this scandal hurt her ornot. But everyone cared violently about hurting Melanie or India and the storm revolved aroundthem, rather than Scarlett, centering upon the one questionDid India lie?

Those who espoused Melanies side pointed triumphantly to the fact that Melanie was constantlywith Scarlett these days. Would a woman of Melanies high principles champion the cause of aguilty woman, especially a woman guilty with her own husband? No, indeed! India was just acracked old maid who hated Scarlett and lied about her and induced Archie and Mrs. Elsing to believeher lies.

But, questioned Indias adherents, if Scarlett isnt guilty, where is Captain Butler? Why isnt hehere at his wifes side, lending her the strength of his countenance? That was an unanswerablequestion and, as the weeks went by and the rumor spread that Scarlett was pregnant, the pro-Indiagroup nodded with satisfaction. It couldnt be Captain Butlers baby, they said. For too long thefact of their estrangement had been public property. For too long the town had been scandalized bythe separate bedrooms.

So the gossip ran, tearing the town apart, tearing apart, too, the close-knit clan of Hamiltons,Wilkeses, Burrs, Whitemans and Winfields. Everyone in the family connection was forced to takesides. There was no neutral ground. Melanie with cool dignity and India with acid bitterness saw tothat. But no matter which side the relatives took, they all were resentful that Scarlett should havebeen the cause of the family breach. None of them thought her worth it. And no matter which sidethey took, the relatives heartily deplored the fact that India had taken it upon herself to wash thefamily dirty linen so publicly and involve Ashley in so degrading a scandal. But now that she hadspoken, many rushed to her defense and took her side against Scarlett, even as others, loving Melanie,stood by her and Scarlett.

Half of Atlanta was kin to or claimed kin with Melanie and India. The ramifications of cousins,double cousins, cousins-in-law and kissing cousins were so intricate and involved that no one but aborn Georgian could ever unravel them. They had always been a clannish tribe, presenting anunbroken phalanx of overlapping shields to the world in time of stress, no matter what their privateopinions of the conduct of individual kinsmen might be. With the exception of the guerrillawarfare carried on by Aunt Pitty against Uncle Henry, which had been a matter for hilariouslaughter within the family for years, there had never been an open breach in the pleasant relations.

They were gentle, quiet spoken, reserved people and not given to even the amiable bickering thatcharacterized most Atlanta families.

But now they were split in twain and the town was privileged to witness cousins of the fifth andsixth degree taking sides in the most shattering scandal Atlanta had ever seen. This worked greathardship and strained the tact and forbearance of the unrelated half of the town, for the India-Melanie feud made a rupture in practically every social organization. The Thalians, the SewingCircle for the Widows and Orphans of the Confederacy, the Association for the Beautification of the Graves of Our Glorious Dead, the Saturday Night Musical Circle, the Ladies Evening CotillionSociety, the Young Mens Library were all involved. So were four churches with their Ladies Aidand Missionary societies. Great care had to be taken to avoid putting members of warring factionson the same committees.

On their regular afternoons at home, Atlanta matrons were in anguish from four to six oclockfor fear Melanie and Scarlett would call at the same time India and her loyal kin were in theirparlors.

Of all the family, poor Aunt Pitty suffered the most. Pitty, who desired nothing except to livecomfortably amid the love of her relatives, would have been very pleased, in this matter, to runwith the hares and hunt with the hounds. But neither the hares nor the hounds would permit this.

India lived with Aunt Pitty and, if Pitty sided with Melanie, as she wished to do, India wouldleave. And if India left her, what would poor Pitty do then? She could not live alone. She wouldhave to get a stranger to live with her or she would have to close up her house and go and live withScarlett Aunt Pitty felt vaguely that Captain Butler would not care for this. Or she would have togo and live with Melanie and sleep in the little cubbyhole that was Beaus nursery.

Pitty was not overly fond of India, for India intimidated her with her dry, stiff-necked ways andher passionate convictions. But she made it possible for Pitty to keep her own comfortableestablishment and Pitty was always swayed more by considerations of personal comfort than bymoral issues. And so India remained.

But her presence in the house made Aunt Pitty a storm center, for both Scarlett and Melanie tookthat to mean that she sided with India. Scarlett curtly refused to contribute more money to Pittysestablishment as long as India was under the same roof. Ashley sent India money every week andevery week India proudly and silently returned it, much to the old ladys alarm and regret.

Finances at the red-brick house would have been in a deplorable state, but for Uncle Henrysintervention, and it humiliated Pitty to take money from him.

Pitty loved Melanie better than anyone in the world, except herself, and now Melly acted like acool, polite stranger. Though she practically lived in Pittys back yard, she never once camethrough the hedge and she used to run in and out a dozen times a day. Pitty called on her and weptand protested her love and devotion, but Melanie always refused to discuss matters and neverreturned the calls.

Pitty knew very well what she owed Scarlettalmost her very existence. Certainly in thoseblack days after the war when Pitty was faced with the alternative of Brother Henry or starvation,Scarlett had kept her home for her, fed her, clothed her and enabled her to hold up her head inAtlanta society. And since Scarlett had married and moved into her own home, she had beengenerosity itself. And that frightening fascinating Captain Butlerfrequently after he called withScarlett, Pitty found brand-new purses stuffed with bills on her console table or lace handkerchiefsknotted about gold pieces which had been slyly slipped into her sewing box. Rhett always vowedhe knew nothing about them and accused her, in a very unrefined way, of having a secret admirer,usually the bewhiskered Grandpa Merriwether.

Yes, Pitty owed love to Melanie, security to Scarlett, and what did she owe India? Nothing, except that Indias presence kept her from having to break up her pleasant life and make decisionsfor herself. It was all most distressing and too, too vulgar and Pitty, who had never made a decisionfor herself in her whole life, simply let matters go on as they were and as a result spent much timein uncomforted tears.

In the end, some people believed whole-heartedly in Scarletts innocence, not because of herown personal virtue but because Melanie believed in it. Some had mental reservations but theywere courteous to Scarlett and called on her because they loved Melanie and wished to keep herlove. Indias adherents bowed coldly and some few cut her openly. These last were embarrassing,infuriating, but Scarlett realized that, except for Melanies championship and her quick action, theface of the whole town would have been set against her and she would have been an outcast.

Chapter 56

RHETT WAS GONE for three months and during that time Scarlett had no word from him. Shedid not know where he was or how long he would be gone. Indeed, she had no idea if he wouldever return. During this time, she went about her business with her head high and her heart sick.

She did not feel well physically but, forced by Melanie, she went to the store every day and tried tokeep up a superficial interest in the mills. But the store palled on her for the first time and,although the business was treble what it had been the year before and the money rolling in, shecould take no interest in it and was sharp and cross with the clerks. Johnnie Galleghers mill wasthriving and the lumber yard selling all his supply easily, but nothing Johnnie did or said pleasedher. Johnnie, as Irish as she, finally erupted into rage at her naggings and threatened to quit, after along tirade which ended with and the back of both me hands to you, Mam, and the curse ofCromwell on you. She had to appease him with the most abject of apologies.

She never went to Ashleys mill. Nor did she go to the lumber-yard office when she thought hewould be there. She knew he was avoiding her, knew that her constant presence in his house, atMelanies inescapable invitations, was a torment to him. They never spoke alone and she wasdesperate to question him. She wanted to know whether he now hated her and exactly what he hadtold Melanie, but he held her at arms length and silently pleaded with her not to speak. The sightof his face, old, haggard with remorse, added to her load, and the fact that his mill lost moneyevery week was an extra irritant which she could not voice.

His helplessness in the face of the present situation irked her. She did not know what he coulddo to better matters but she felt that he should do something. Rhett would have done something.

Rhett always did something, even if it was the wrong thing, and she unwillingly respected him forit.

Now that her first rage at Rhett and his insults had passed, she began to miss him and she missedhim more and more as days went by without news of him. Out of the welter of rapture and angerand heartbreak and hurt pride that he had left, depression emerged to sit upon her shoulder like acarrion crow. She missed him, missed his light flippant touch in anecdotes that made her shoutwith laughter, his sardonic grin that reduced troubles to their proper proportions, missed even hisjeers that stung her to angry retort. Most of all she missed having him to tell things to. Rhett was sosatisfactory in that respect She could recount shamelessly and with pride how she had skinned people out of their eyeteeth and he would applaud. And if she even mentioned such things to otherpeople they were shocked.

She was lonely without him and Bonnie. She missed the child more than she had thoughtpossible. Remembering the last harsh words Rhett had hurled at her about Wade and Ella, she triedto fill in some of her empty hours with them. But it was no use. Rhetts words and the childrensreactions opened her eyes to a startling, a galling truth. During the babyhood of each child she hadbeen too busy, too worried with money matters, too sharp and easily vexed, to win their confidenceor affection. And now, it was either too late or she did not have the patience or the wisdom topenetrate their small secretive hearts.

Ella! It annoyed Scarlett to realize that Ella was a silly child but she undoubtedly was. Shecouldnt keep her little mind on one subject any longer than a bud could stay on one twig and evenwhen Scarlett tried to tell her stories, Ella went off at childish tangents, interrupting with questionsabout matters that had nothing to do with the story and forgetting what she had asked long beforeScarlett could get the explanation out of her mouth. And as for Wadeperhaps Rhett was rightPerhaps he was afraid of her. That was odd and it hurt her. Why should her own boy, her only boy,be afraid of her? When she tried to draw him out in talk, he looked at her with Charles soft browneyes and squirmed and twisted his feet in embarrassment. But with Melanie, he bubbled over withtalk and brought from his pocket everything from fishing worms to old strings to show her.

Melanie had a way with brats. There was no getting around it. Her own little Beau was the bestbehaved and most lovable child in Atlanta. Scarlett got on better with him than she did with herown son because little Beau had no self-consciousness where grown people were concerned andclimbed on her knee, uninvited, whenever he saw her. What a beautiful blond boy he was, just likeAshley! Now if only Wade were like Beau Of course, the reason Melanie could do so much withhim was that she had only one child and she hadnt had to worry and work as Scarlett had. At leastScarlett tried to excuse herself that way but honesty forced her to admit that Melanie loved childrenand would have welcomed a dozen. And the overbrimming affection she had was poured outon Wade and the neighbors broods.

Scarlett would never forget the shock of the day she drove by Melanies house to pick up Wadeand heard, as she came up the front walk, the sound of her sons voice raised in a very fairimitation of the Rebel YellWade who was always as still as a mouse at home. And manfullyseconding Wades yell was the shrill piping of Beau. When she had walked into the sitting roomshe had found the two charging at the sofa with wooden swords. They had hushed abashed as sheentered and Melanie had arisen, laughing and clutching at hairpins and flying curls from where shewas crouching behind the sofa.

Its Gettysburg, she explained. And Im the Yankees and Ive gotten the worst of it. This isGeneral Lee, pointing to Beau, and this is General Pickett, putting an arm about Wadesshoulder.

Yes, Melanie had a way with children that Scarlett could never fathom.

At least, she thought, Bonnie loves me and likes to play with me. But honesty forced her toadmit that Bonnie infinitely preferred Rhett to her. And perhaps she would never see Bonnie again.

For all she knew, Rhett might be in Persia or Egypt and intending to stay there forever.

When Dr. Meade told her she was pregnant, she was astounded, for she had been expecting adiagnosis of biliousness and over-wrought nerves. Then her mind fled back to that wild night andher face went crimson at the memory. So a child was coming from those moments of high raptureeven if the memory of the rapture was dimmed by what followed. And for the first time she wasglad that she was going to have a child. If it were only a boy! A fine boy, not a spiritless littlecreature like Wade. How she would care for him! Now that she had the leisure to devote to a babyand the money to smooth his path, how happy she would be! She had an impulse to write to Rhettin care of his mother in Charleston and tell him. Good Heavens, he must come home now!

Suppose he stayed away till after the baby was born! She could never explain that! But if she wrotehim hed think she wanted him to come home and he would be amused. And he mustnt ever thinkshe wanted him or needed him.

She was very glad she had stifled this impulse when her first news of Rhett came in a letter fromAunt Pauline in Charleston where, it seemed, Rhett was visiting his mother. What a relief to knowhe was still in the United States, even if Aunt Paulines letter was infuriating. Rhett had broughtBonnie to see her and Aunt Eulalie and the letter was full of praise.

Such a little beauty! When she grows up she will certainly be a belle. But I suppose you knowthat any man who courts her will have a tussle with Captain Butler, for I never saw such a devotedfather. Now, my dear, I wish to confess something. Until I met Captain Butler, I felt that yourmarriage with him had been a dreadful mesalliance for, of course, no one in Charleston hearsanything good about him and everyone is so sorry for his family. In fact, Eulalie and I wereuncertain as to whether or not we should receive himbut, after all, the dear child is our great-niece. When he came, were pleasantly surprised, most pleasantly, and realized how un-Christianitistocreditidleg(we) ossip. For he is most charming. Quite handsome, too, we thought, andso very grave and courteous. And so devoted to you and the child.

And now, my dear, I must write you of something that has come to our earssomethingEulalie and I were loath to believe at first. We had heard, of course, that you sometimes did aboutat the store that Mr. Kennedy had left you. We had heard rumors but, of course, we denied them.

We realized that in those first dreadful days after the war, it was perhaps necessary, conditionsbeing what they were. But there is no necessity now for such conduct on your part, as I knowCaptain Butler is in quite comfortable circumstances and is, moreover, fully capable of managingfor you any business and property you may own. We had to know the truth of these rumors andwere forced to ask Captain Butler point-blank questions which was most distressing to all of us.

With reluctance he told us that you spent your mornings at the store and would permit no oneelse to do the bookkeeping. He also admitted that you had some interest in a mill or mills (we didnot press him on this, being most upset at this information which was news to us) that necessitatedyour riding about alone, or attended by a ruffian who, Captain Butler assures us, is a murderer. Wecould see how this wrung his heart and think he must be a most indulgentin fact, a far tooindulgent husband. Scarlett, this must stop. Your mother is not here to command you and I must doit in her place. Think how your little children will feel when they grow older and realize that youwere in trade! How mortified they will be to know that you exposed yourself to the insults of rudemen and the dangers of careless gossip in attending to mills. Such unwomanly

Scarlett flung down the letter unfinished, with an oath. She could just see Aunt Pauline and Aunt Eulalie sitting in judgment on her in the crumbling house on the Battery with little between themand starvation except what she, Scarlett, sent them every month. Unwomanly? By God, if shehadnt been unwomanly Aunt Pauline and Aunt Eulalie probably wouldnt have a roof over theirheads this very moment. And damn Rhett for telling them about the store and the bookkeeping andthe mills! Reluctant, was he? She knew very well the joy he took in palming himself off on the oldladies as grave, courteous and charming, the devoted husband and father. How he must have lovedharrowing them with descriptions of her activities with the store, the mills, the saloon. What adevil he was. Why did such perverse things give him such pleasure?

But soon, even this rage passed into apathy. So much of the keen zest had gone out of liferecently. If only she could recapture the thrill and the glow of Ashleyif only Rhett would comehome and make her laugh.

They were home again, without warning. The first intimation of their return was the sound ofluggage being thumped on the front-hall floor and Bonnies voice crying, Mother!

Scarlett hurried from her room to the top of the stairs and saw her daughter stretching her shortplump legs in an effort to climb the steps. A resigned striped kitten was clutched to her breast.

Granma gave him to me, she cried excitedly, holding the kitten out by the scruff.

Scarlett swept her up into her arms and kissed her, thankful that the childs presence spared herher first meeting alone with Rhett Looking over Bonnies head, she saw him in the hall below,paying the cab driver. He looked up, saw her and swept off his hat in a wide gesture, bowing as hedid. When she met his dark eyes, her heart leaped. No matter what he was, no matter what he haddone, he was home and she was glad.

Wheres Mammy? asked Bonnie, wriggling in Scarletts grasp and she reluctantly set the childon her feetIt was going to be more difficult than she anticipated, greeting Rhett with just the proper degreeof casualness and, as for telling him about the new baby! She looked at his face as he came up thesteps, that dark nonchalant face, so impervious, so blank. No, shed wait to tell him. She couldnttell him right away. And yet, such tidings as these belonged first to a husband, for a husband wasalways happy to hear them. But she did not think he would be happy about it.

She stood on the landing, leaning against the banisters and wondered if he would kiss her. Buthe did not. He said only: You are looking pale, Mrs. Butler. Is there a rouge shortage?

No word of missing her, even if he didnt mean it. And he might have at least kissed her in frontof Mammy who, after bobbing a curtsy, was leading Bonnie away down the hall to the nursery. Hestood beside her on the landing, his eyes appraising her carelessly.

Can this wanness mean that youve been missing me? he questioned and though his lipssmiled, his eyes did not.

So that was going to be his attitude. He was going to be as hateful as ever. Suddenly the childshe was carrying became a nauseating burden instead of something she had gladly carried, and thisman before her, standing carelessly with his wide Panama hat upon his hip, her bitterest foe, the cause of all her troubles. There was venom in her eyes as she answered, venom that was toounmistakable to be missed, and the smile went from his face.

If Im pale its your fault and not because Ive missed you, you conceited thing. Its because

Oh, she hadnt intended to tell him like this but the hot words rushed to her lips and she flung themat him, careless of the servants who might hear. Its because Im going to have a baby!

He sucked in his breath suddenly and his eyes went rapidly over her. He took a quick steptoward her as though to put a hand on her arm but she twisted away from him, and before the hatein her eyes his face hardened.

Indeed! he said coolly. Well, whos the happy father? Ashley?

She clutched the newel post until the ears of the carved lion dug with sudden pain into her palm.

Even she who knew him so well had not anticipated this insult. Of course, he was joking but therewere some jokes too monstrous to be borne. She wanted to rake her sharp nails across his eyes andblot out that queer light in them.

Damn you! she began, her voice shaking with sick rage. Youyou know its yours. And Idont want it any more than you do. Nono woman would want the children of a cad like you. Iwish Oh, God, I wish it was anybodys baby but yours!

She saw his swarthy face change suddenly, anger and something she could not analyze making ittwitch as though stung.

There! she thought in a hot rage of pleasure. There! Ive hurt him now!

But the old impassive mask was back across his face and he stroked one side of his mustache.

Cheer up, he said, turning from her and starting up the stairs, maybe youll have amiscarriage.

For a dizzy moment she thought what childbearing meant, the nausea that tore her, the tediouswaiting, the thickening of her figure, the hours of pain. Things no man could ever realize. And hedared to joke. She would claw him. Nothing but the sight of blood upon his dark face would easethis pain in her heart. She lunged for him, swift as a cat, but with, a light startled movement, hesidestepped, throwing up his arm to ward her off. She was standing on the edge of the freshlywaxed top step, and as her arm with the whole weight of her body behind it, struck his out-thrustarm, she lost her balance. She made a wild clutch for the newel post and missed it. She went downthe stairs backwards, feeling a sickening dart of pain in her ribs as she landed. And, too dazed tocatch herself, she rolled over and over to the bottom of the flight.

It was the first time Scarlett had ever been ill, except when she had her babies, and somehowthose times did not count. She had not been forlorn and frightened then, as she was now, weak andpain racked and bewildered. She knew she was sicker than they dared tell her, feebly realized thatshe might die. The broken rib stabbed when she breathed, her bruised face and head ached and herwhole body was given over to demons who plucked at her with hot pinchers and sawed on her withdull knives and left her, for short intervals, so drained of strength that she could not regain grip onherself before they returned. No, childbirth had not been like this. She had been able to eat hearty meals two hours after Wade and Ella and Bonnie had been born, but now the thought of anythingbut cool water brought on feeble nausea.

How easy it was to have a child and how painful not to have one! Strange, what a pang it hadbeen even in her pain, to know that she would not have this child. Stranger still that it should havebeen the first child she really wanted. She tried to think why she wanted it but her mind was tootired. Her mind was too tired to think of anything except fear of death. Death was in the room andshe had no strength to confront it, to fight it back and she was frightened. She wanted someonestrong to stand by her and hold her hand and fight off death until enough strength came back forher to do her own fighting.

Rage had been swallowed up in pain and she wanted Rhett. But he was not there and she couldnot bring herself to ask for him.

Her last memory of him was how he looked as he picked her up in the dark hall at the bottom ofthe steps, his face white and wiped clean of all save hideous fear, his voice hoarsely calling forMammy. And then there was a faint memory of being carried upstairs, before darkness came overher mind. And then pain and more pain and the room full of buzzing voices and Aunt Pittypatssobs and Dr. Meades brusque orders and feet that hurried on the stairs and tiptoes in the upperhall. And then like a blinding ray of lightning, the knowledge of death and fear that suddenly madeher try to scream a name and the scream was only a whisper.

But that forlorn whisper brought instant response from somewhere in the darkness beside thebed and the soft voice of the one she called made answer in lullaby tones: Im here, dear. Ivebeen right here all the time.

Death and fear receded gently as Melanie took her hand and laid it quietly against her coolcheek. Scarlett tried to turn to see her face and could not. Melly was having a baby and theYankees were coming. The town was afire and she must hurry, hurry. But Melly was having a babyand she couldnt hurry. She must stay with her till the baby came and be strong because Mellyneeded her strength. Melly was hurting so badthere were hot pinchers at her and dull knives andrecurrent waves of pain. She must hold Mellys hand.

But Dr. Meade was there after all, he had come, even if the soldiers at the depot did need him forshe heard him say: Delirious. Wheres Captain Butler?

The night was dark and then light and sometimes she was having a baby and sometimes it wasMelanie who cried out, but through it all Melly was there and her hands were cool and she did notmake futile anxious gestures or sob like Aunt Pitty. Whenever Scarlett opened her eyes, she saidMelly? and the voice answered. And usually she started to whisper: RhettI want Rhett andremembered, as from a dream, that Rhett didnt want her, that Rhetts face was dark as an Indiansand his teeth were white in a jeer. She wanted him and he didnt want her.

Once she said Melly? and Mammys voice said: Sme, chile, and put a cold rag on herforehead and she cried fretfully: MellyMelanie over and over but for a long time Melanie didnot come. For Melanie was sitting on the edge of Rhetts bed and Rhett, drunk and sobbing, wassprawled on the floor, crying, his head in her lap.

Every time she had come out of Scarletts room she had seen him, sitting on his bed, his door wide, watching the door across the hall. The room was untidy, littered with cigar butts and dishesof untouched food. The bed was tumbled and unmade and he sat on it, unshaven and suddenlygaunt, endlessly smoking. He never asked questions when he saw her. She always stood in thedoorway for a minute, giving the news: Im sorry, shes worse, or No, she hasnt asked for youyet. You see, shes delirious or You mustnt give up hope, Captain Butler. Let me fix you somehot coffee and something to eat. Youll make yourself ill.

Her heart always ached with pity for him, although she was almost too tired and sleepy to feelanything. How could people say such mean things about himsay he was heartless and wickedand unfaithful to Scarlett, when she could see him getting thin before her eyes, see the torment inhis face? Tired as she was, she always tried to be kinder than usual when she gave bulletins fromthe sick room. He looked so like a damned soul waiting judgmentso like a child in a suddenlyhostile world. But everyone was like a child to Melanie.

But when, at last, she went joyfully to his door to tell him that Scarlett was better, she wasunprepared for what she found. There was a half-empty bottle of whisky on the table by the bedand the room reeked with the odor. He looked at her with bright glazed eyes and his jaw musclestrembled despite his efforts to set his teeth.

Shes dead?

Oh, no. Shes much better.

He said: Oh, my God, and put his head in his hands. She saw his wide shoulders shake as witha nervous chill and, as she watched him pityingly, her pity changed to honor for she saw that hewas crying. Melanie had never seen a man cry and of all men, Rhett, so suave, so mocking, soeternally sure of himself.

It frightened her, the desperate choking sound he made. She had a terrified thought that he wasdrunk and Melanie was afraid of drunkenness. But when he raised his head and she caught oneglimpse of his eyes, she stepped swiftly into the room, closed the door softly behind her and wentto him. She had never seen a man cry but she had comforted the tears of many children. When sheput a soft hand on his shoulder, his arms went suddenly around her skirts. Before she knew how ithappened she was sitting on the bed and he was on the floor, his head in her lap and his arms andhands clutching her in a frantic clasp that hurt her.

She stroked the black head gently and said: There! There! soothingly. There! Shes going toget well.

At her words, his grip tightened and he began speaking rapidly, hoarsely, babbling as though to agrave which would never give up its secrets, babbling the truth for the first time in his life, baringhimself mercilessly to Melanie who was at first, utterly uncomprehending, utterly maternal. Hetalked brokenly, burrowing his head in her lap, tugging at the folds of her skirt Sometimes hiswords were blurred, muffled, sometimes they came far too clearly to her ears, harsh, bitter wordsof confession and abasement, speaking of things she had never heard even a woman mention,secret things that brought the hot blood of modesty to her cheeks and made her grateful for hisbowed head.

She patted his head as she did little Beaus and said: Hush! Captain Butler! You must not tell me these things! You are not yourself. Hush! But his voice went on in a wild torrent of outpouringand he held to her dress as though it were his hope of life.

He accused himself of deeds she did not understand; he mumbled the name of Belle Watling andthen he shook her with his violence as he cried: Ive killed Scarlett, Ive killed her. You dontunderstand. She didnt want this baby and

You must hush! You are beside yourself! Not want a baby? Why every woman wants

No! No! You want babies. But she doesnt. Not my babies

You must stop!

You dont understand. She didnt want a baby and I made her. Thisthis babyits all mydamned fault. We hadnt been sleeping together

Hush, Captain Butler! It is not fit

And I was drunk and insane and I wanted to hurt herbecause she had hurt me. I wanted toand I did but she didnt want me. Shes never wanted me. She never has and I triedI tried sohard and

Oh, please!

And I didnt know about this baby till the other day when she fell: She didnt know where Iwas to write to me and tell mebut she wouldnt have written me if she had known. I tell youItell you Id have come straight homeif Id only knownwhether she wanted me home ornot. ...

Oh, yes, I know you would!

God, Ive been crazy these weeks, crazy and drunk! And when she told me, there on the stepswhat did I do? What did I say? I laughed and said: Cheer up. Maybe youll have a miscarriage.

And she

Melanie suddenly went white and her eyes widened with horror as she looked down at the blacktormented head writhing in her lap. The afternoon sun streamed in through the open window andsuddenly she saw, as for the first time, how large and brown and strong his hands were and howthickly the black hairs grew along the backs of them. Involuntarily, she recoiled from them. Theyseemed so predatory, so ruthless and yet, twined in her skirt, so broken, so helpless.

Could it be possible that he had heard and believed the preposterous lie about Scarlett andAshley and become jealous? True, he had left town immediately after the scandal broke but No,it couldnt be that. Captain Butler was always going off abruptly on journeys. He couldnt havebelieved the gossip. He was too sensible. If that had been the cause of the trouble, wouldnt hehave tried to shoot Ashley? Or at least demanded an explanation?

No, it couldnt be that. It was only that he was drunk and sick from strain and his mind wasrunning wild, like a man delirious, babbling wild fantasies. Men couldnt stand strains as well aswomen. Something had upset him, perhaps he had had a small quarrel with Scarlett and magnifiedit. Perhaps some of the awful things he said were true. But all of them could not be true. Oh, notthat last, certainly! No man could say such a thing to a woman he loved as passionately as this man loved. Scarlett Melanie had never seen evil, never seen cruelty, and now that she looked on themfor the first time she found them too inconceivable to believe. He was drunk and sick. And sickchildren must be humored.

There! There! she said crooningly. Hush, now. I understand.

He raised his head violently and looked up at her with bloodshot eyes, fiercely throwing off herhands.

No, by God, you dont understand! You cant understand! Youreyoure too good tounderstand. You dont believe me but its all true and Im a dog. Do you know why I did it? I wasmad, crazy with jealousy. She never cared for me and I thought I could make her care. But shenever cared. She doesnt love me. She never has. She loves

His passionate, drunken gaze met hers and he stopped, mouth open, as though for the first timehe realized to whom he was speaking. Her face was white and strained but her eyes were steadyand sweet and full of pity and unbelief. There was a luminous serenity in them and the innocencein the soft brown depths struck him like a blow in the face, clearing some of the alcohol out of hisbrain, halting his mad, careering words in mid-flight. He trailed off into a mumble, his eyesdropping away from hers, his lids batting rapidly as he fought back to sanity.

Im a cad, he muttered, dropping his head tiredly back into her lap. But not that big a cad.

And if I did tell you, you wouldnt believe me, would you? Youre too good to believe me. I neverbefore knew anybody who was really good. You wouldnt believe me, would you?

No, I wouldnt believe you, said Melanie soothingly, beginning to stroke his hair again. Shesgoing to get well. There, Captain Butler! Dont cry! Shes going to get well.

Chapter 57

IT WAS A PALE, thin woman that Rhett put on the Jonesboro train a month later. Wade and Ella,who were to make the trip with her, were silent and uneasy at their mothers still, white face. Theyclung close to Prissy, for even to their childish minds there was something frightening in the cold,impersonal atmosphere between their mother and their stepfather.

Weak as she was, Scarlett was going home to Tara. She felt that she would stifle if she stayed inAtlanta another day, with her tired mind forcing itself round and round the deeply worn circle offutile thoughts about the mess she was in. She was sick in body and weary in mind and she wasstanding like a lost child in a nightmare country in which there was no familiar landmark to guideher.

As she had once fled Atlanta before an invading army, so she was fleeing it again, pressing herworries into the back of her mind with her old defense against the world: I wont think of it now. Icant stand it if I do. Ill think of it tomorrow at Tara. Tomorrows another day. It seemed that ifshe could only get back to the stillness and the green cotton fields of home, all her troubles wouldfall away and she would somehow be able to mold her shattered thoughts into something she couldlive by.

Rhett watched the train until it was out of sight and on his face there was a look of speculativebitterness that was not pleasant. He sighed, dismissed the carriage and mounting his horse, rodedown Ivy Street toward Melanies house.

It was a warm morning and Melanie sat on the vine-shaded porch, her mending basket piledhigh with socks. Confusion and dismay filled her when she saw Rhett alight from his horse andtoss the reins over the arm of the cast-iron negro boy who stood at the sidewalk. She had not seenhim alone since that too dreadful day when Scarlett had been so ill and he had been sowellsodrunk. Melanie hated even to think the word. She had spoken to him only casually duringScarletts convalescence and, on those occasions, she had found it difficult to meet his eyes.

However, he had been his usual bland self at those times, and never by look or word showed thatsuch a scene had taken place between them. Ashley had told her once that men frequently did notremember things said and done in drink and Melanie prayed heartily that Captain Butlers memoryhad failed him on that occasion. She felt she would rather die than learn that he remembered hisoutpourings. Timidity and embarrassment swept over her and waves of color mounted her cheeksas he came up the walk. But perhaps he had only come to ask if Beau could spend the day withBonnie. Surely he wouldnt have the bad taste to come and thank her for what she had done thatday!

She rose to meet him, noting with surprise, as always, how lightly he walked for a big man.

Scarlett has gone?

Yes. Tara will do her good, he said smiling. Sometimes I think shes like the giant Antaeuswho became stronger each time he touched Mother Earth. It doesnt do for Scarlett to stay awaytoo long from the patch of red mud she loves. The sight of cotton growing will do her more goodthan all Dr. Meades tonics.

Wont you sit down? said Melanie, her hands fluttering. He was so very large and male, andexcessively male creatures always discomposed her. They seem to radiate a force and vitality thatmade her feel smaller and weaker even than she was. He looked so swarthy and formidable and theheavy muscles in his shoulders swelled against his white linen coat in a way that frightened her. Itseemed impossible that she had seen all this strength and insolence brought low. And she had heldthat black head in her lap!

Oh, dear! she thought in distress and blushed again.

Miss Melly, he said gently, does my presence annoy you? Would you rather I went away?

Pray be frank.

Oh! she thought. He does remember! And he knows how upset I am!

She looked up at him, imploringly, and suddenly her embarrassment and confusion faded. Hiseyes were so quiet, so kind, so understanding that she wondered how she could ever have beensilly enough to be flurried. His face looked tired and, she thought with surprise, more than a littlesad. How could she have even thought hed be ill bred enough to bring up subjects both wouldrather forget?

Poor thing, hes been so worried about Scarlett, she thought, and managing a smile, she said:

Do sit down, Captain Butler.

He sat down heavily and watched her as she picked up her darning.

Miss Melly, Ive come to ask a very great favor of you and, he smiled and his mouth twisteddown, to enlist your aid in a deception from which I know you will shrink.

Adeception?

Yes. Really, Ive come to talk business to you.

Oh, dear. Then its Mr. Wilkes youd better see. Im such a goose about business. Im not smartlike Scarlett.

Im afraid Scarlett is too smart for her own good, he said, and that is exactly what I want totalk to you about. You know howill shes been. When she gets back from Tara she will startagain hammer and tongs with the store and those mills which I wish devoutly would explode somenight. I fear for her health, Miss Melly.

Yes, she does far too much. You must make her stop and take care of herself.

He laughed.

You know how headstrong she is. I never even try to argue with her. Shes just like a willfulchild. She wont let me help hershe wont let anyone help her. Ive tried to get her to sell hershare in the mills but she wont. And now, Miss Melly, I come to the business matter. I knowScarlett would sell the remainder of her interest in the mills to Mr. Wilkes but to no one else, and Iwant Mr. Wilkes to buy her out.

Oh, dear me! That would be nice but Melanie stopped and bit her lip. She could notmention money matters to an outsider. Somehow, despite what he made from the mill, she andAshley never seemed to have enough money. It worried her that they saved so little. She did not know where the money went. Ashley gave her enough to run the house on, but when it came toextra expenses they were often pinched. Of course, her doctors bills were so much, and then thebooks and furniture Ashley ordered from New York did run into money. And they had fed andclothed any number of waifs who slept in their cellar. And Ashley never felt like refusing a loan toany man whod been in the Confederate Army. AndMiss Melly, I want to lend you the money, said RhettThats so kind of you, but we might never repay it.

I dont want it repaid. Dont be angry with me, Miss Melly! Please hear me through. It willrepay me enough to know that Scarlett will not be exhausting herself driving miles to the millsevery day. The store will be enough to keep her busy and happy. ... Dont you see?

Wellyes said Melanie uncertainly.

You want your boy to have a pony dont you? And want him to go to the university and toHarvard and to Europe on a Grand Tour?

Oh, of course, cried Melanie, her face lighting up, as always, at the mention of Beau. I wanthim to have everything butwell, everyone is so poor these days that

Mr. Wilkes could make a pile of money out of the mills some day, said Rhett. And Id like tosee Beau have all the advantages he deserves.

Oh, Captain Butler, what a crafty wretch you are! she cried, smiling. Appealing to a motherspride! I can read you like a book.

I hope not, said Rhett, and for the first time there was a gleam in his eye. Now will you letme lend you the money?

But where does the deception come in?

We must be conspirators and deceive both Scarlett and Mr. Wilkes.

Oh, dear! I couldnt!

If Scarlett knew I had plotted behind her back, even for her own goodwell, you know hertemper! And Im afraid Mr. Wilkes would refuse any loan I offered him. So neither of them mustknow where the money comes from.

Oh, but Im sure Mr. Wilkes wouldnt refuse, if he understood the matter. He is so fond ofScarlett.

Yes, Im sure he is, said Rhett smoothly. But just the same he would refuse. You know howproud all the Wilkes are.

Oh, dear! cried Melanie miserably, I wish Really, Captain Butler, I couldnt deceive myhusband.

Not even to help Scarlett? Rhett looked very hurt. And she is so fond of you!

Tears trembled on Melanies eyelids.

You know Id do anything in the world for her. I can never, never half repay her for what shes done for me. You know.

Yes, he said shortly, I know what shes done for you. Couldnt you tell Mr. Wilkes that themoney was left you in the will of some relative?

Oh, Captain Butler, I havent a relative with a penny to bless him!

Then, if I sent the money through the mail to Mr. Wilkes without his knowing who sent it,would you see that it was used to buy the mills and notwell, given away to destitute ex-Confederates?

At first she looked hurt at his last words, as though they implied criticism of Ashley, but hesmiled so understandingly she smiled back.

Of course I will.

So its settled? Its to be our secret?

But I have never kept anything secret from my husband!

Im sure of that, Miss Melly.

As she looked at him she thought how right she had always been about him and how wrong somany other people were. People had said he was brutal and sneering and bad mannered and evendishonest Though many of the nicest people were now admitting they had been wrong. Well! Shehad known from the very beginning that he was a fine man. She had never received from himanything but the kindest treatment, thoughtfulness, utter respect and what understanding! And then,how he loved Scarlett! How sweet of him to take this roundabout way of sparing Scarlett one ofthe loads she carried!

In an impulsive rush of feeling, she said: Scarletts lucky to have a husband whos so nice toher!

You think so? Im afraid she wouldnt agree with you, if she could hear you. Besides, I want tobe nice to you too, Miss Melly. Im giving you more than Im giving Scarlett.

Me! she questioned, puzzled. Oh, you mean for Beau.

He picked up his hat and rose. He stood for a moment looking down at the plain, heart-shapedface with its long widows peak and serious dark eyes. Such an unworldly face, a face with nodefenses against life.

No, not Beau. Im trying to give you something more than Beau, if you can imagine that

No, I cant, she said, bewildered again. Theres nothing in the world more precious to methan Beau except Ashexcept Mr. Wilkes.

Rhett said nothing and looked down at her, his dark face still.

Youre mighty nice to want to do things for me, Captain Butler, but really, Im so lucky. I haveeverything in the world any woman could want.

Thats fine, said Rhett, suddenly grim. And I intend to see that you keep them.

When Scarlett came back from Tara, the unhealthy pallor had gone from her face and her cheekswere rounded and faintly pink. Her green eyes were alert and sparkling again, and she laughedaloud for the first time in weeks when Rhett and Bonnie met her and Wade and Ella at the depotlaughed in annoyance and amusement. Rhett had two straggling turkey feathers in the brim of hishat and Bonnie, dressed in a sadly torn dress that was her Sunday frock, had diagonal lines ofindigo blue on her cheeks and a peacock feather half as long as she was in her curls. Evidently agame of Indian had been in progress when the time came to meet the train and it was obvious fromthe look of quizzical helplessness on Rhetts face and the lowering indignation of Mammy thatBonnie had refused to have her toilet remedied, even to meet her mother.

Scarlett said: What a ragamuffin! as she kissed the child and turned a cheek for Rhetts lips.

There were crowds of people in the depot or she would never have invited this caress. She couldnot help noticing, for all her embarrassment at Bonnies appearance, that everyone in the crowdwas smiling at the figure father and daughter cut, smiling not in derision but in genuine amusementand kindness. Everyone knew that Scarletts youngest had her father under her thumb and Atlantawas amused and approving. Rhetts great love for his child had gone far toward reinstating him inpublic opinion.

On the way home, Scarlett was full of County news. The hot, dry weather was making thecotton grow so fast you could almost hear it but Will said cotton prices were going to be low thisfall. Suellen was going to have another babyshe spelled this out so the children would notcomprehendand Ella had shown unwonted spirit in biting Suellens oldest girl. Though,observed Scarlett, it was no more than little Susie deserved, she being her mother all over again.

But Suellen had become infuriated and they had had an invigorating quarrel that was just like oldtimes. Wade had killed a water moccasin, all by himself. Randa and Camilla Tarleton wereteaching school and wasnt that a joke? Not a one of the Tarletons had ever been able to spell cat!

Betsy Tarleton had married a fat one-armed man from Lovejoy and they and Hetty and JimTarleton were raising a good cotton crop at Fairhill. Mrs. Tarleton had a brood mare and a colt andwas as happy as though she had a million dollars. And there were negroes living in the old Calverthouse! Swarms of them and they actually owned it! Theyd bought it in at the sheriffs sale. Theplace was dilapidated and it made you cry to look at it. No one knew where Cathleen and her no-good husband had gone. And Alex was to marry Sally, his brothers widow! Imagine that, afterthem living in the same house for so many years! Everybody said it was a marriage of conveniencebecause people were beginning to gossip about them living there alone, since both Old Miss andYoung Miss had died. And it had about broken Dimity Munroes heart. But it served her right Ifshed had any gumption shed have caught her another man long ago, instead of waiting for Alexto get money enough to marry her.

Scarlett chattered cheerfully but there were many things about the County which shesuppressed,thingsthath(on) urt to think about. She had driven over the County with Will, trying not toremember when these thousands of fertile acres had stood green with cotton. Now, plantation afterplantation was going back to the forest and dismal fields of broomsedge, scrub oak and runty pineshad grown stealthily about silent ruins and over old cotton fields. Only one acre was being farmednow where once a hundred had been under the plow. It was like moving through a dead land.

This section wont come back for fifty yearsif it ever comes back, Will had said. Taras the best farm in the County, thanks to you and me, Scarlett, but its a farm, a two-mule farm, not aplantation. And the Fontaine place, it comes next to Tare and then the Tarletons. They aint makin

much money but theyre getting along and they got gumption. But most of the rest of the folks,the rest of the farms

No, Scarlett did not like to remember the way the deserted County looked. It seemed evensadder, in retrospect beside the bustle and prosperity of Atlanta.

Has anything happened here? she asked when they were finally home and were seated on thefront porch. She had talked rapidly and continuously all the way home, fearing that a silence wouldfall. She had not had a word alone with Rhett since that day when she fell down the steps and shewas none too anxious to be alone with him now. She did not know how he felt toward her. He hadbeen kindness itself during her miserable convalescence, but it was the kindness of an impersonalstranger. He had anticipated her wants, kept the children from bothering her and supervised thestore and the mills. But he had never said: Im sorry. Well, perhaps he wasnt sorry. Perhaps hestill thought that child that was never born was not his child. How could she tell what went on inthe mind behind the bland dark face? But he had showed a disposition to be courteous, for the firsttime in their married life, and a desire to let life go on as though there had never been anythingunpleasant between themas though, thought Scarlett cheerlessly, as though there had never beenanything at all between them. Well, if that was what he wanted, she could act her part too.

Is everything all right? she repeated. Did you get the new shingles for the store? Did youswap the mules? For Heavens sake, Rhett, take those feathers out of your hat. You look a fool andyoull be likely to wear them downtown without remembering to take them out.

No, said Bonnie, picking up her fathers hat defensively.

Everything has gone very well here, replied Rhett. Bonnie and I have had a nice time and Idont believe her hair has been combed since you left. Dont suck the feathers, darling, they maybe nasty. Yes, the shingles are fixed and I got a good trade on the mules. No, theres really nonews. Everything has been quite dull.

Then, as an afterthought he added: The honorable Ashley was over here last night. He wantedto know if I thought you would sell him your mill and the part interest you have in his.

Scarlett who had been rocking and fanning herself with a turkey tail fan, stopped abruptly.

Sell? Where on earth did Ashley get the money? You know they never have a cent. Melaniespends it as fast as he makes it.

Rhett shrugged. I always thought her a frugal little person, but then Im not as well informedabout the intimate details of the Wilkes family as you seem to be.

That jab seemed in something of Rhetts old style and Scarlett grew annoyed.

Run away, dear, she said to Bonnie. Mother wants to talk to Father.

No, said Bonnie positively and climbed upon Rhetts lap.

Scarlett frowned at her child and Bonnie scowled back in so complete a resemblance to GeraldOHara that Scarlett almost laughed.

Let her stay, said Rhett comfortably. As to where he got the money, it seems it was sent himby someone he nursed through a case of smallpox at Rock Island. It renews my faith in humannature to know that gratitude still exists.

Who was it? Anyone we know?

The letter was unsigned and came from Washington. Ashley was at a loss to know who couldhave sent it. But then, one of Ashleys unselfish temperament goes about the world doing so manygood deeds that you cant expect him to remember all of them.

Had she not been so surprised at Ashleys windfall, Scarlett would have taken up this gauntlet,although while at Tara she had decided that never again would she permit herself to be involved inany quarrel with Rhett about Ashley. The ground on which she stood in this matter was entirely toouncertain and, until she knew exactly where she stood with both men, she did not care to be drawnout.

He wants to buy me out?

Yes. But Of course, I told him you wouldnt sell.

I wish youd let me mind my own business.

Well, you know you wouldnt part with the mills. I told him that he knew as well as I did thatyou couldnt bear not to have your finger in everybodys pie, and if you sold out to him, then youwouldnt be able to tell him how to mind his own business.

You dared say that to him about me?

Why not? Its true, isnt it? I believe he heartily agreed with me but of course, he was too muchof a gentleman to come right out and say so.

Its a lie! I will sell them to him! cried Scarlett angrily.

Until that moment, she had had no idea of parting with the mills. She had several reasons forwanting to keep them and their monetary value was the least reason. She could have sold them forlarge sums any time in the last few years, but she had refused all offers. The mills were the tangibleevidence of what she had done, unaided and against great odds, and she was proud of them and ofherself. Most of all, she did not want to sell them because they were the only path that lay open toAshley. If the mills went from her control it would mean that she would seldom see Ashley andprobably never see him alone. And she had to see him alone. She could not go on this way anylonger, wondering what his feelings toward her were now, wondering if all his love had died inshame since the dreadful night of Melanies party. In the course of business she could find manyopportune times for conversations without it appearing to anyone that she was seeking him out.

And, given time, she knew she could gain back whatever ground she had lost in his heart. But ifshe sold the millsNo, she did not want to sell but, goaded by the thought that Rhett had exposed her to Ashley inso truthful and so unflattering a light, she had made up her mind instantly. Ashley should have themills and at a price so low he could not help realizing how generous she was.

I will sell! she cried furiously. Now, what do you think of that?

There was the faintest gleam of triumph in Rhetts eyes as he bent to tie Bonnies shoe string.

I think youll regret it, he said.

Already she was regretting the hasty words. Had they been spoken to anyone save Rhett shewould have shamelessly retracted them. Why had she burst out like that? She looked at Rhett withan angry frown and saw that he was watching her with his old keen, cat-at-a-mouse-hole look.

When he saw her frown, he laughed suddenly, his white teeth flashing. Scarlett had an uncertainfeeling that he had jockeyed her into this position.

Did you have anything to do with this? she snapped.

I? His brows went up in mock surprise. You should know me better. I never go about theworld doing good deeds if I can avoid it.

That night she sold the mills and all her interest in them to Ashley. She did not lose thereby forAshley refused to take advantage of her first low offer and met the highest bid that she had everhad for them. When she had signed the papers and the mills were irrevocably gone and Melaniewas passing small glasses of wine to Ashley and Rhett to celebrate the transaction, Scarlett feltbereft as though she had sold one of her children.

The mills had been her darlings, her pride, the fruit of her small grasping hands. She had startedwith one little mill in those black days when Atlanta was barely struggling up from ruin and ashesand want was staring her in the face. She had fought and schemed and nursed them through thedark times when Yankee confiscation loomed, when money was tight and smart men going to thewall. And now when Atlanta was covering its scars and buildings were going up everywhere andnewcomers flocking to the town every day, she had two fine mills, two lumber yards, a dozen muleteams and convict labor to operate the business at low cost Bidding farewell to them was likeclosing a door forever on a part of her life, a bitter, harsh part but one which she recalled with anostalgic satisfaction.

She had built up this business and now she had sold it and she was oppressed with the certaintythat, without her at the helm, Ashley would lose it alleverything that she had worked to build.

Ashley trusted everyone and still hardly knew a two-by-four from a six-by-eight. And now shewould never be able to give him the benefit of her adviceall because Rhett had told him that sheliked to boss everything.

Oh, damn Rhett! she thought and as she watched him the conviction grew that he was at thebottom of all this. Just how and why she did not know. He was talking to Ashley and his wordsbrought her up sharply.

I suppose youll turn the convicts back right away, he said.

Turn the convicts back? Why should there be any idea of turning them back? Rhett knewperfectly well that the large profits from the mills grew out of the cheap convict labor. And whydid Rhett speak with such certainty about what Ashleys future actions would be? What did heknow of him?

Yes, theyll go back immediately, replied Ashley and he avoided Scarletts dumbfounded gaze.

Have you lost your mind? she cried. Youll lose all the money on the lease and what kind oflabor can you get, anyway?

Ill use free darkies, said Ashley.

Free darkies! Fiddle-dee-dee! You know what their wages will cost and besides youll have theYankees on your neck every minute to see if youre giving them chicken three times a day andtucking them to sleep under eiderdown quilts. And if you give a lazy darky a couple of licks tospeed him up, youll hear the Yankees scream from here to Dalton and youll end up in jail. Why,convicts are the only

Melanie looked down into her lap at her twisted hands. Ashley looked unhappy but obdurate.

For a moment he was silent Then his gaze crossed Rhetts and it was as if he found understandingand encouragement in Rhetts eyesa glance that was not lost on Scarlett.

I wont work convicts, Scarlett, he said quietly.

Well, sir! her breath was taken away. And why not? Are you afraid people will talk about youlike they do about me?

Ashley raised his head.

Im not afraid of what people say as long as Im right. And I have never felt that convict laborwas right.

But why

I cant make money from the enforced labor and misery of others.

But you owned slaves!

They werent miserable. And besides, Id have freed them all when Father died if the warhadnt already freed them. But this is different, Scarlett. The system is open to too many abuses.

Perhaps you dont know it but I do. I know very well that Johnnie Gallegher has killed at least oneman at his camp. Maybe morewho cares about one convict, more or less? He said the man waskilled trying to escape, but thats not what Ive heard elsewhere. And I know he works men whoare too sick to work. Call it superstition, but I do not believe that happiness can come from moneymade from the sufferings of others.

Gods nightgown! You meangoodness, Ashley, you didnt swallow all the ReverendWallaces bellowings about tainted money?

I didnt have to swallow it I believed it long before he preached on it.

Then, you must think all my money is tainted, cried Scarlett beginning to be angry. Because Iworked convicts and own saloon property and She stopped short. Both the Wilkes lookedembarrassed and Rhett was grinning broadly. Damn him, thought Scarlett, vehemently. Hesthinking that Im sticking my finger in other peoples pies again and so is Ashley. Id like to cracktheir heads together! She swallowed her wrath and tried to assume an aloof air of dignity but withlittle success.

Of course, its immaterial to me, she said.

Scarlett, dont think Im criticizing you! Im not. Its just that we look at things in differentways and what is good for you might not be good for me.

She suddenly wished that they were alone, wished ardently that Rhett and Melanie were at theend of the earth, so she could cry out: But I want to look at things the way you look at them! Tellme just what you mean, so I can understand and be like you!

But with Melanie present, trembling with the distress of the scene, and Rhett lounging, grinningat her, she could only say with as much coolness and offended virtue as she could muster: Imsure its your own business, Ashley, and far be it from me to tell you how to run it. But, I must say,I do not understand your attitude or your remarks.

Oh, if they were only alone, so she would not be forced to say these cool things to him, thesewords that were making him unhappy!

Ive offended you, Scarlett, and I did not mean to. You must believe me and forgive me. Thereis nothing enigmatic in what I said. It is only that I believe that money which comes in certainways seldom brings happiness.

But youre wrong! she cried, unable to restrain herself any longer. Look at me! You knowhow my money came. You know how things were before I made my money! You remember thatwinter at Tara when it was so cold and we were cutting up the carpets for shoes and there wasntenough to eat and we used to wonder how we were going to give Beau and Wade an education.

You remem

I remember, said Ashley tiredly, but Id rather forget.

Well, you cant say any of us were happy then, can you? And look at us now! Youve a nicehome and a good future. And has anyone a prettier house than mine or nicer clothes or finerhorses? Nobody sets as fine a table as me or gives nicer receptions and my children have everythingthey want. Well, how did I get the money to make it possible? Off trees? No, sir! Convictsand saloon rentals and

And dont forget murdering that Yankee, said Rhett softly. He really gave you your start.

Scarlett swung on him, furious words on her lips.

And the money has made you very, very happy, hasnt it, darling? he asked, poisonouslysweet.

Scarlett stopped short, her mouth open, and her eyes went swiftly to the eyes of the other three.

Melanie was almost crying with embarrassment, Ashley was suddenly bleak and withdrawn andRhett was watching her over his cigar with impersonal amusement. She started to cry out: But ofcourse, its made me happy!

But somehow, she could not speak.

Chapter 58

IN THE TIME that followed her illness Scarlett noticed a change in Rhett and she was notaltogether certain that she liked it. He was sober and quiet and preoccupied. He was at home more often for supper now and he was kinder to the servants and more affectionate to Wade and Ella. Henever referred to anything in their past, pleasant or otherwise, and silently seemed to dare her tobring up such subjects. Scarlett held her peace, for it was easier to let well enough alone, and lifewent on smoothly enough, on the surface. His impersonal courtesy toward her that had begunduring her convalescence continued and he did not fling softly drawled barbs at her or sting herwith sarcasm. She realized now that though he had infuriated her with his malicious comments androused her to heated rejoinders, he had done it because he cared what she did and said. Now shewondered if he cared about anything she did. He was polite and disinterested and she missed hisinterest, perverse though it had been, missed the old days of bickering and retort.

He was pleasant to her now, almost as though she were a stranger; but, as his eyes had oncefollowed her, they now followed Bonnie. It was as though the swift flood of his life had beendiverted into one narrow channel. Sometimes Scarlett thought that if Rhett had given her one-halfthe attention and tenderness he lavished on Bonnie, life would have been different. Sometimes itwas hard to smile when people said: How Captain Butler idolizes that child! But, if she did notsmile, people would think it strange and Scarlett hated to acknowledge, even to herself, that shewas jealous of a little girl, especially when that little girl was her favorite child. Scarlett alwayswanted to be first in the hearts of those around her and it was obvious now that Rhett and Bonniewould always be first with each other.

Rhett was out late many nights but he came home sober on these nights. Often she heard himwhistling softly to himself as he went down the hall past her closed door. Sometimes men camehome with him in the late hours and sat talking in the dining room around the brandy decanter.

They were not the same men with whom he had drunk the first year they were married. No richCarpetbaggers, no Scalawags, no Republicans came to the house now at his invitation. Scarlett,creeping on tiptoe to the banister of the upstairs hall, listened and, to her amazement, frequentlyheard the voices of Ren Picard, Hugh Rising, the Simmons boys and Andy Bonnell. And alwaysGrandpa Merriwether and Uncle Henry were there. Once, to her astonishment, she heard the tonesof Dr. Meade. And these men had once thought hanging too good for Rhett!

This group was always linked in her mind with Franks death, and the late hours Rhett keptthese days reminded her still more of the times preceding the Klan foray when Frank lost his life.

She remembered with dread Rhetts remark that he would even join their damned Klan to be respectable,though he hoped God would not lay so heavy a penance on his shoulders. SupposeRhett, like FrankOne night when he was out later than usual she could stand the strain no longer. When she heardthe rasp of his key in the lock, she threw on a wrapper and, going into the gas lit upper hall, methim at the top of the stairs. His expression, absent, thoughtful, changed to surprise when he sawher standing there.

Rhett, Ive got to know! Ive got to know if youif its the Klanis that why you stay out solate? Do you belong

In the flaring gas light he looked at her incuriously and then he smiled.

You are way behind the times, he said. There is no Klan in Atlanta now. Probably not inGeorgia. Youve been listening to the Klan outrage stories of your Scalawag and Carpetbagger friends.

No Klan? Are you lying to try to soothe me?

My dear, when did I ever try to soothe you? No, there is no Klan now. We decided that it didmore harm than good because it just kept the Yankees stirred up and furnished more grist for theslander mill of his Excellency, Governor Bullock. He knows he can stay in power just so long ashe can convince the Federal government and the Yankee newspapers that Georgia is seething withrebellion and theres a Klansman hiding behind every bush. To keep in power hes beendesperately manufacturing Klan outrage stories where none exist, telling of loyal Republicansbeing hung up by the thumbs and honest darkies lynched for rape. But hes shooting at anonexistent target and he knows it. Thank you for your apprehensions, but there hasnt been anactive Klan since shortly after I stopped being a Scalawag and became an humble Democrat.

Most of what he said about Governor Bullock went in one ear and out the other for her mindwas mainly occupied with relief that there was no Klan any longer. Rhett would not be killed asFrank was killed; she wouldnt lose her store or his money. But one word of his conversation swamto the top of her mind. He had said we, linking himself naturally with those he had once calledthe Old Guard.

Rhett she asked suddenly, did you have anything to do with the breaking up of the Klan?

He gave her a long look and his eyes began to dance. My love, I did. Ashley Wilkes and I aremainly responsible.

Ashleyand you?

Yes, platitudinously but truly, politics make strange bedfellows. Neither Ashley nor I caredmuch for each other as bedfellows but Ashley never believed in the Klan because hes againstviolence of any sort. And I never believed in it because its damned foolishness and not the way toget what we want. Its the one way to keep the Yankees on our necks till Kingdom Come. And betweenAshley and me, we convinced the hot heads that watching, waiting and working would getus further than nightshirts and fiery crosses.

You dont mean the boys actually took your advice when you

When I was a speculator? A Scalawag? A consorter with Yankees? You forget Mrs. Butler, thatI am now a Democrat in good standing, devoted to my last drop of blood to recovering our belovedstate from the hands of her ravishers! My advice was good advice and they took it. My advice inother political matters is equally good. We have a Democratic majority in the legislature now,havent we? And soon, my love, we will have some of our good Republican friends behind thebars. They are a bit too rapacious these days, a bit too open.

Youd help put them in jail? Why, they were your friends! They let you in on that railroad-bondbusiness that you made thousands out of!

Rhett grinned suddenly, his old mocking grin.

Oh, I bear them no ill will. But Im on the other side now and if I can assist in any way inputting them where they belong, Ill do it. And how that will redound to my credit! I know justenough about the inside of some of these deals to be very valuable when the legislature starts digging into themand that wont be far off, from the way things look now. Theyre going toinvestigate the governor, too, and theyll put him in jail if they can. Better tell your good friendsthe Gelerts and the Hundons to be ready to leave town on a minutes notice, because if they cannab the governor, theyll nab them too.

For too many years Scarlett had seen the Republicans, backed up by the force of the YankeeArmy, in power in Georgia to believe Rhetts light words. The governor was too stronglyentrenched for any legislature to do anything to him, much less put him in jail.

How you do run on, she observed.

If he isnt put in jail, at least he wont be reelected. Were going to have a Democratic governornext time, for a change.

And I suppose youll have something to do with it? she questioned sarcastically.

My pet, I will. I am having something to do with it now. Thats why I stay out so late at nights.

Im working harder than I ever worked with a shovel in the gold rush, trying to help get theelection organized. AndI know this will hurt you, Mrs. Butler, but I am contributing plenty ofmoney to the organization, too. Do you remember telling me, years ago, in Franks store, that itwas dishonest for me to keep the Confederate gold? At last Ive come to agree with you and theConfederate gold is being spent to get the Confederates back into power.

Youre pouring money down a rat hole!

What! You call the Democratic party a rat hole? His eyes mocked her and then were quiet,expressionless. It doesnt matter a damn to me who wins this election. What does matter is thateveryone knows Ive worked for it and that Ive spent money on it. And thatll be remembered inBonnies favor in years to come.

I was almost afraid from your pious talk that youd had a change of heart, but I see youve gotno more sincerity about the Democrats than about anything else.

Not a change of heart at all. Merely a change of hide. You might possibly sponge the spots off aleopard but hed remain a leopard, just the same.

Bonnie, awakened by the sound of voices in the hall, called sleepily but imperiously: Daddy!

and Rhett started past Scarlett.

Rhett, wait a minute. Theres something else I want to tell you. You must stop taking Bonniearound with you in the afternoons to political meetings. It just doesnt look well. The idea of a littlegirl at such places! And it makes you look so silly. I never dreamed that you took her until UncleHenry mentioned it, as though he thought I knew and

He swung round on her and his face was hard.

How can you read wrong in a little girl sitting on her fathers lap while he talks to friends? Youmay think it looks silly but it isnt silly. People will remember for years that Bonnie sat on my lapwhile I helped run the Republicans out of this state. People will remember for years Thehardness went out of his face and a malicious light danced in his eyes. Did you know that whenpeople ask her who she loves best, she says Daddy and the Demiquats, and who she hates most,she says: The Scallywags. People, thank God, remember things like that

Scarletts voice rose furiously. And I suppose you tell her Im a Scalawag!

Daddy! said the small voice, indignant now, and Rhett, still laughing, went down the hall tohis daughter.

That October Governor Bullock resigned his office and fled from Georgia. Misuse of publicfunds, waste and corruption had reached such proportions during his administration that the edificewas toppling of its own weight. Even his own party was split, so great had public indignationbecome. The Democrats had a majority in the legislature now, and that meant just one thing.

Knowing that he was going to be investigated and fearing impeachment, Bullock did not wait. Hehastily and secretly decamped, arranging that his resignation would not become public until he wassafely in the North.

When it was announced, a week after his flight, Atlanta was wild with excitement and joy.

People thronged the streets, men laughing and shaking hands in congratulation, ladies kissing eachother and crying. Everybody gave parties in celebration and the fire department was kept busyfighting the flames that spread from the bonfires of jubilant small boys.

Almost out of the woods! Reconstructions almost over! to be sure, the acting governor was aRepublican too, but the election was coming up in December and there was no doubt in anyonesmind as to what the result would be. And when the election came, despite the frantic efforts of theRepublicans, Georgia once more had a Democratic governor.

There was joy then, excitement too, but of a different sort from that which seized the town whenBullock took to his heels. This sober heartfelt joy, a deep-souled feeling of thanksgiving,andthechurcheswerefill(was) ed(a) asmin(more) isters reverently thanked God for the deliveranceof the state. There was pride too, mingled with the elation and joy, pride that Georgia was back inthe hands of her own people again, in spite of all the administration in Washington could do, inspite of the army, the Carpetbaggers, the Scalawags and the native Republicans.

Seven times Congress had passed crushing acts against the state to keep it a conquered province,three times the army had set aside civil law. The negroes had frolicked through the legislature,grasping aliens had mismanaged the government, private individuals had enriched themselvesfrom public funds. Georgia had been helpless, tormented, abused, hammered down. But now, inspite of them all, Georgia belonged to herself again and through the efforts of her own people.

The sudden overturn of the Republicans did not bring joy to everyone. There was consternationin the ranks of the Scalawags, the Carpetbaggers and the Republicans. The Gelerts and Hundons,evidently apprised of Bullocks departure before his resignation became public, left town abruptly,disappearing into that oblivion from which they had come. The other Carpetbaggers andScalawags who remained were uncertain, frightened, and they hovered together for comfort,wondering what the legislative investigation would bring to light concerning their own privateaffairs. They were not insolent now. They were stunned, bewildered, afraid. And the ladies whocalled on Scarlett said over and over:

But who would have thought it would turn out this way? We thought the governor was toopowerful. We thought he was here to stay. We thought

Scarlett was equally bewildered by the turn of events, despite Rhetts warning as to the directionit would take. It was not that she was sorry Bullock had gone and the Democrats were back again.

Though no one would have believed it she, too, felt a grim happiness that the Yankee rule was atlast thrown off. She remembered all too vividly her struggles during those first days ofReconstruction, her fears that the soldiers and the Carpetbaggers would confiscate her money andher property. She remembered her helplessness and her panic at her helplessness and her hatred ofthe Yankees who had imposed this galling system upon the South. And she had never stoppedhating them. But, in trying to make the best of things, in trying to obtain complete security, she hadgone with the conquerors. No matter how much she disliked them, she had surrounded herself withthem, cut herself off from her old friends and her old ways of living. And now the power of theconquerors was at an end. She had gambled on the continuance of the Bullock regime and she hadlostAs she looked about her, that Christmas of 1871, the happiest Christmas the state had known inover ten years, she was disquieted. She could not help seeing that Rhett, once the most execratedman in Atlanta, was now one of the most popular, for he had humbly recanted his Republicanheresies and given his time and money and labor and thought to helping Georgia fight her wayback. When he rode down the streets, smiling, tipping his hat, the small blue bundle that wasBonnie perched before him on his saddle, everyone smiled back, spoke with enthusiasm andlooked with affection on the little girl. Whereas, she, Scarlett

Chapter 59

THERE WAS NO DOUBT in anyones mind that Bonnie Butler was running wild and needed afirm hand but she was so general a favorite that no one had the heart to attempt the necessaryfirmness. She had first gotten out of control the months when she traveled with her father. Whenshe had been with Rhett in New Orleans and Charleston she had been permitted to sit up as late asshe pleased and had gone to sleep in his arms in theaters, restaurants and at card tables. Thereafter,nothing short of force would make her go to bed at the same time as the obedient Ella. While shehad been away with him, Rhett had let her wear any dress she chose and, since that time, she hadgone into tantrums when Mammy tried to dress her in dimity frocks and pinafores instead of bluetaffeta and lace collars.

There seemed no way to regain the ground which had been lost when the child was away fromhome and later when Scarlett had been ill and at Tara. As Bonnie grew older Scarlett tried todiscipline her, tried to keep her from becoming too headstrong and spoiled, but with little success.

Rhett always sided with the child, no matter how foolish her desires or how outrageous herbehavior. He encouraged her to talk and treated her as an adult, listening to her opinions withapparent seriousness and pretending to be guided by them. As a result, Bonnie interrupted herelders whenever she pleased and contradicted her father and put him in his place. He only laughedand would not permit Scarlett even to slap the little girls hand by way of reprimand.

If she wasnt such a sweet, darling thing, shed be impossible, thought Scarlett ruefully,realizing that she had a child with a will equal to her own. She adores Rhett and he could makeher behave better if he wanted to.

But Rhett showed no inclination to make Bonnie behave. Whatever she did was right and if shewanted the moon she could have it, if he could reach it for her. His pride in her beauty, her curls,her dimples, her graceful little gestures was boundless. He loved her pertness, her high spirits andthe quaint sweet manner she had of showing her love for him. For all her spoiled and willful waysshe was such a lovable child that he lacked the heart to try to curb her. He was her god, the centerof her small world, and that was too precious for him to risk losing by reprimands.

She clung to him like a shadow. She woke him earlier than he cared to wake, sat beside him atthe table, eating alternately from his plate and her own, rode in front of him on his horse andpermitted no one but Rhett to undress her and put her to sleep in the small bed beside his.

It amused and touched Scarlett to see the iron hand with which her small child ruled her father.

Who would have thought that Rhett, of all people, would take fatherhood so seriously? Butsometimes a dart of jealousy went through Scarlett because Bonnie, at the age of four, understoodRhett better than she had ever understood him and could manage him better than she had evermanaged him.

When Bonnie was four years old, Mammy began to grumble about the impropriety of a girlchild riding a-straddle in front of her pa wid her dress flyin up. Rhett lent an attentive ear to thisremark, as he did to all Mammys remarks about the proper raising of little girls. The result was asmall brown and white Shetland pony with a long silky mane and tail and a tiny sidesaddle withsilver trimmings. Ostensibly the pony was for all three children and Rhett bought a saddle forWade too. But Wade infinitely preferred his St. Bernard dog and Ella was afraid of all animals. Sothe pony became Bonnies own and was named Mr. Butler. The only flaw in Bonnies possessivejoy was that she could not still ride astride like her father, but after he had explained how muchmore difficult it was to ride on the sidesaddle, she was content and learned rapidly. Rhetts pride inher good seat and her good hands was enormous.

Wait till shes old enough to hunt, he boasted. Therell be no one like her on any field. Ill takeher to Virginia then. Thats where the real hunting is. And Kentucky where they appreciate goodriders.

When it came to making her riding habit, as usual she had her choice of colors and as usualchose blue.

But, my darling! Not that blue velvet! The blue velvet is for a party dress for me, laughedScarlett. A nice black broadcloth is what little girls wear. Seeing the small black brows comingtogether: For Heavens sake, Rhett, tell her how unsuitable it would be and how dirty it will get.

Oh, let her have the blue velvet. If it gets dirty, well make her another one, said Rhett easily.

So Bonnie had her blue velvet habit with a skirt that trailed down the ponys side and a black hatwith a red plume in it, because Aunt Mellys stories of Jeb Stuarts plume had appealed to herimagination. On days that were bright and dear the two could be seen riding down PeachtreeStreet, Rhett reining in his big black horse to keep pace with the fat ponys gait. Sometimes theywent tearing down the quiet roads about the town, scattering chickens and dogs and children,Bonnie beating Mr. Butler with her crop, her tangled curls flying, Rhett holding in his horse with afirm hand that she might think Mr. Butler was winning the race.

When he had assured himself of her seat, her hands, her utter fearlessness, Rhett decided that thetime had come for her to learn to make the low jumps that were within the reach of Mr. Butlersshort legs. To this end, he built a hurdle in the back yard and paid Wash, one of Uncle Peters smallnephews, twenty-five cents a day to teach Mr. Butler to jump. He began with a bar two inches fromthe ground and gradually worked up the height to a foot.

This arrangement met with the disapproval of the three parties concerned, Wash, Mr. Butler andBonnie. Wash was afraid of horses and only the princely sum offered induced him to take thestubborn pony over the bar dozens of times a day; Mr. Butler, who bore with equanimity havinghis tail pulled by his small mistress and his hooves examined constantly, felt that the Creator ofponies had not intended him to put his fat body over the bar; Bonnie, who could not bear to seeanyone else upon her pony, danced with impatience while Mr. Butler was learning his lessons.

When Rhett finally decided that the pony knew his business well enough to trust Bonnie uponhim, the childs excitement was boundless. She made her first jump with flying colors and,thereafter, riding abroad with her father held no charms for her. Scarlett could not help laughing atthe pride and enthusiasm of father and daughter. She thought, however, that once the novelty hadpassed, Bonnie would turn to other things and the neighborhood would have some peace. But thissport did not pall. There was a bare track worn from the arbor at the far end of the yard to thehurdle, and all morning long the yard resounded with excited yells. Grandpa Merriwether, who hadmade the overland trip in 1849, said that the yells sounded just like an Apache after a successfulscalping.

After the first week, Bonnie begged for a higher bar, a bar that was a foot and a half from theground.

When you are six years old, said Rhett. Then youll be big enough for a higher jump and Illbuy you a bigger horse. Mr. Butlers legs arent long enough.

They are, too, I jumped Aunt Mellys rose bushes and they are normously high!

No, you must wait, said Rhett, firm for once. But the firmness gradually faded away beforeher incessant importunings and tantrums.

Oh, all right, he said with a laugh one morning and moved the narrow white cross bar higher.

If you fall off, dont cry and blame me!

Mother! screamed Bonnie, turning her head up toward Scarletts bedroom. Mother! Watchme! Daddy says I can!

Scarlett, who was combing her hair, came to the window and smiled down at the tiny excitedfigure, so absurd in the soiled blue habit.

I really must get her another habit, she thought. Though Heaven only knows how Ill makeher give up that dirty one.

Mother, watch!

Im watching dear, said Scarlett smiling.

As Rhett lifted the child and set her on the pony, Scarlett called with a swift rush of pride at thestraight back and the proud set of the head, Youre mighty pretty, precious!

So are you, said Bonnie generously and, hammering a heel into Mr. Butlers ribs, she gallopeddown the yard toward the arbor.

Mother, watch me take this one! she cried, laying on the crop.

Watch me take this one!

Memory rang a bell far back in Scarletts mind. There was something ominous about thosewords. What was it? Why couldnt she remember? She looked down at her small daughter, solightly poised on the galloping pony and her brow wrinkled as a chill swept swiftly through herbreast. Bonnie came on with a rush, her crisp black curls jerking, her blue eyes blazing.

They are like Pas eyes, thought Scarlett, Irish blue eyes and shes just like him in everyway.

And, as she thought of Gerald, the memory for which she had been rumbling came to herswiftly, came with the heart stopping clarity of summer lightning, throwing, for an instant, a wholecountryside into unnatural brightness. She could hear an Irish voice singing, hear the hard rapidpounding of hooves coming up the pasture hill at Tara, hear a reckless voice, so like the voice ofher child: Ellen! Watch me take this one!

No! she cried. No! Oh, Bonnie, stop!

Even as she leaned from the window there was a fearful sound of splintering wood, a hoarse cryfrom Rhett, a melee of blue velvet and flying hooves on the ground. Then Mr. Butler scrambled tohis feet and trotted off with an empty saddle.

On the third night after Bonnies death, Mammy waddled slowly up the kitchen steps ofMelanies house. She was dressed in black from her huge mens shoes, slashed to permit freedomfor her toes, to her black head rag. Her blurred old eyes were bloodshot and red rimmed, and miserycried out in every line of her mountainous figure. Her face was puckered in the sadbewilderment of an old ape but there was determination in her jaw.

She spoke a few soft words to Dilcey who nodded kindly, as though an unspoken armisticeexisted in their old feud. Dilcey put down the supper dishes she was holding and went quietlythrough the pantry toward the dining room. In a minute Melanie was in the kitchen, her tablenapkin in her hand, anxiety in her face.

Miss Scarlet isnt

Miss Scarlett bearin up, same as allus, said Mammy heavily. Ah din ten ter sturb yo

supper, Miss Melly. Ah kin wait tell you thoo ter tell you whut Ah got on mah mine.

Supper can wait, said Melanie. Dilcey, serve the rest of the supper. Mammy, come with me.

Mammy waddled after her, down the hall past the dining room where Ashley sat at the head ofthe table, his own little Beau beside him and Scarletts two children opposite, pairing a great clatterwith their soup spoons. The happy voices of Wade and Ella filled the room. It was like a picnic forthem to spend so long a visit with Aunt Melly. Aunt Melly was always so kind and she was especially so now. The death of their younger sister had affected them very little. Bonnie had fallenoff her pony and Mother had cried a long time and Aunt Melly had taken them home with her toplay in the back yard with Beau and have tea cakes whenever they wanted them.

Melanie led the way to the small book-lined sitting room, shut the door and motioned Mammyto the sofa.

I was going over right after supper, she said. Now that Captain Butlers mother has come, Isuppose the funeral will be tomorrow morning.

De funel. Dats jes it, said Mammy. Miss Melly, wes all in deep trouble an Ahs come teryou fer hep. Ain nuthin but weery load, honey, nuthin but weery load.

Has Miss Scarlett collapsed? questioned Melanie worriedly. Ive hardly seen her sinceBonnie She has been in her room and Captain Butler has been out of the house and

Suddenly tears began to flow down Mammys black face. Melanie sat down beside her andpatted her arm and, after a moment, Mammy lifted the hem of her black skirt and dried her eyes.

You got ter come hep us, Miss Melly. Ah done de besAh kin but it doan do no good.

Miss Scarlett

Mammy straightened.

Miss Melly, you knows Miss Scarlett wells Ah does. Whut dat chile got ter stan, de goodLawd give her strent ter stan. Disyere done broke her heart but she kin stan it. Its Mist Rhett Ahcome bout.

I have so wanted to see him but whenever Ive been there, he has either been downtown orlocked in his room with And Scarlett has looked like a ghost and wouldnt speak Tell mequickly, Mammy. You know Ill help if I can.

Mammy wiped her nose on the back of her hand. Ah say Miss Scarlett kin stan whut de Lawdsen, kase she done had ter stan a-pleny, but Mist Rhett Miss Melly, he ain never had ter stan

nuthin he din wanter stan, not nuthin. Its him Ah come ter see you bout.

But

Miss Melly, you got ter come home wid me, dis evenin. There was urgency in Mammysvoice. Maybe Mist Rhett lissen ter you. He allus did think a heap of yo pinion.

Oh, Mammy, what is it? What do you mean?

Mammy squared her shoulders.

Miss Melly, Mist Rhett donedone los his mine. He woan let us put Lil Miss away.

Lost his mind? Oh, Mammy, no!

Ah ain lyin. Its de Gawds truff. He ain gwine let us buhy dat chile. He done tole me sohisseff, not mon an hour ago.

But he canthe isnt

Dats huccome Ah say he los his mine.

But why

Miss Melly, Ah tell you everything. Ah oughtn tell nobody, but you is our fambly an you is deonlies one Ah kin tell. Ah tell you eveything. You knows whut a sto he set by dat chile. Ah ain

never seed no man, black or wite, set sech a sto by any chile. Look lak he go plumb crazy wenDoctah Meade say her neck broke. He grab his gun an he run right out an shoot dat po pony an,fo Gawd, Ah think he gwine shoot hisseff. Ah wuz plumb stracted whut wid Miss Scarlett in aswoon an all de neighbors in an outer de house an Mist Rhett cahyin on an jes holin dat chilean not even lettin me wash her lil face whar de grabble cut it. An wen Miss Scarlett come to, Ahthink, bress Gawd! Now dey kin comfot each other.

Again the tears began to fall but this time Mammy did not even wipe them away.

But wen she come to, she go inter de room whar he setin, holin Miss Bonnie, an she say:

Gimme mah baby whut you kilt.

Oh, no! She couldnt!

Yasm. Dat whut she say. She say: You kilt her. An Ah felt so sorry fer Mist Rhett Ah bustout cryin, kase he look lak a whup houn. An Ah say: Give dat chile ter its mammy. Ah ain

gwine have no sech goins on over mah Lil Miss. An Ah tek de chile away frum him an tek herinter her room an wash her face. An Ah hear dem talkin an it lak ter tuhn mah blood cole, whutdey say. Miss Scarlett wuz callin him a mudderer fer lettin her try ter jump dat high, an himsayin Miss Scarlett hadn never keered nuthin bout Miss Bonnie nor none of her chillun. ...

Stop, Mammy! Dont tell me any more. It isnt right for you to tell me this! cried Melanie, hermind shrinking away from the picture Mammys words evoked.

Ah knows Ah got no bizness tellin you, but mah heart too full ter know jes whut not ter say.

Den he tuck her ter de unnertakers hisseff an he bring her back an he put her in her baid in hisroom. An wen Miss Scarlett say she blong in de pahlor in de coffin, Ah thought Mist Rhettgwine hit her. An he say, right cole lak: She blong in mah room. An he tuhn ter me an he say:

Mammy, you se dat she stay right hyah tell Ah gits back. Den he light outer de house on de hawsean he wuz gone tell bout sundown. Wen he come tarin home, Ah seed dat hed been drinkin

an drinkin heavy, but he wuz cahyin it wells usual. He fling inter de house an not even speak terMiss Scarlett or Miss Pitty or any of de ladies as wuz callin, but he fly up de steps an thow opende do of his room an den he yell for me. Wen Ah comes runnin as fas as Ah kin, he wuz stanin

by de baid an it wuz so dahk in de room Ah couldn sceercely see him, kase de shutters wuz donedrawed.

An he say ter me, right fierce lak: Open dem shutters. Its dahk in hyah. An Ah fling demopen an he look at me an, fo Gawd, Miss Melly, mah knees bout give way, kase he look sostrange. Den he say: Bring lights. Bring lots of lights. An keep dem buhnin. An doan draw noshades an no shutters. Doan you know Miss Bonnies fraid of de dahk?

Melanies horror struck eyes met Mammys and Mammy nodded ominously.

Dats whut he say. Miss Bonnies fraid of de dahk.

Mammy shivered.

Wen Ah gits him a dozen candles, he say Git! An den he lock de do an dar he set wid LilMiss, an he din open de do fer Miss Scarlett even wen she beat an hollered ter him. An dats deway it been fer two days. He woan say nuthin bout de funel, an in de mawnin he lock de do an

git on his hawse an go off ter town. An he come back at sundown drunk an lock hisseff in agin,an he ain et nuthin or slept none. An now his ma, Ole Miss Butler, she come frum Chaston ferde funel an Miss Suellen an Mist Will, dey come frum Tara, but Mist Rhett woan talk ter noneof dem. Oh, Miss Melly, it been awful! An its gwine be wuss, an folks gwine talk sumpin

scanlous.

An den, dis evenin, Mammy paused and again wiped her nose on her hand. Dis evenin

Miss Scarlett ketch him in de upstairs hall wen he come in, an she go in de room wid him an shesay: De funel set fer termorrer mawnin.An he say: Do dat anAh kills you termorrer.

Oh, he must have lost his mind!

Yasm. An den dey talks kinder low an Ah doan hear all whut dey say, cept he say agin boutMiss Bonnie bein sceered of de dahk an de grabe powful dahk. An affer awile, Miss Scarlettsay You is a fine one ter tek on so, affer killin her ter please yo pride. An he say: Ain you gotno mercy? An she say: No. An Ah ain got no chile, needer. An Ahm woout wid de way youbeen ackin sence Bonnie wuz kilt. You is a scanal ter de town. You been drunk all de time an efyou doan think Ah knows whar you been spendin yo days, you is a fool. Ah knows you beendown ter dat creeters house, dat Belle Watling.

Oh, Mammy, no!

Yasm. Dat whut she said. An, Miss Melly, its de truff. Niggers knows a heap of thingsquicker dan wite folks, an Ah knowed dats whar he been but Ah ain said nuthin bout it An hedoan deny it He say: Yasm, dats whar Ah been an you neen tek on, kase you doan give a damn.

A bawdy house is a haben of refuge affer dis house of hell. An Belle is got one of de worls kines

hearts. She doan thow it up ter me dat Ah done kilt mah chile.

Oh, cried Melanie, stricken to the heart.

Her own life was so pleasant, so sheltered, so wrapped about with people who loved her, so fullof kindness that what Mammy told her was almost beyond comprehension or belief. Yet therecrawled into her mind a memory, a picture which she hastily put from her, as she would put fromher the thought of anothers nudity. Rhett had spoken of Belle Watling the day he cried with hishead on her knees. But he loved Scarlett. She could not have been mistaken that day. And ofcourse, Scarlett loved him. What had come between them? How could a husband and a wife cuteach other to pieces with such sharp knives?

Mammy took up her story heavily.

Affer a wile, Miss Scarlett come outer de room, wite as a sheet but her jaw set, an she see mestanin dar an she say: De funel be termorrer, Mammy. An she pass me by lak a ghos. Denmah heart tuhn over, kase whut Miss Scarlett say, she mean. An whut Mist Rhett say, he meantoo. An he say he kill her ef she do dat. Ah wuz plumb stracted, Miss Melly, kase Ah done hadsumpin on mah conscience all de time an it weighin me down. Miss Melly, it wuz me as sceeredLil Miss of de dahk.

Oh, but Mammy, it doesnt matternot now.

Yasm, it do. Dat whut de whole trouble. An it come ter me Ah better tell Mist Rhett even efhe kill me, kase it on mah conscience. So Ah slip in de doreal quick, fo he kin lock it, anAh say:

Mist Rhett, Ahs come ter confess. An he swung roun on me lak a crazy man an say: Git!

An, fo Gawd, Ah ain never been so sceered! But Ah say: Please, suh, Mist Rhett, let me tellyou. Its bout ter kill me. It wuz me as sceered Lil Miss of de dahk. An den, Miss Melly, Ah putmah haid down an waited fer him ter hit me. But he din say nuthin. An Ah say: Ah din meanno hahm. But, Mist Rhett, dat chile din have no caution an she wuzn sceered of nuthin. An shewuz allus gittin outer baid affer eveybody sleep an runnin roun de house barefoot An it worritme, kase Ah fraid she hut herseff. So Ah tells her dars ghoses an buggerboos in de dahk.

An denMiss Melly, you know whut he done? His face got right gentle lak an he come terme an put his han on mah arm. Dats de fust time he ever done dat. An he say: She wuz sobrave, wuzn she? Cept fer de dahk, she wuzn sceered of nuthin. An wen Ah bust out cryin hesay: Now, Mammy, an he pat me. Now, Mammy, doan you cahy on so. Ahs glad you tole me.

Ah knows you love Miss Bonnie an kase you love her, it doan matter. Its whut de heart is datmatter. Wellm dat kinder cheered me up, so Ah ventu ter say: Mist Rhett, suh, what bout defunel? Den he tuhn on me lak a wile man an his eyes glitter an he say: Good Gawd, Ah thoughtyoud unnerstan even ef nobody else din! Does you think Ahm gwine ter put mah chile away inde dahk wen she so sceered of it? Right now Ah kin hear de way she uster scream wen she wakeup in de dahk. Ah ain gwine have her sceered. Miss Melly, den Ah know he los his mine. Hedrunk an he need sleep an sumpin ter eat but dat ain all. He plumb crazy. He jes push me outerde do an say: Git de hell outer hyah!

Ah goes downstairs an Ah gits ter thinkin dat he say dar ain gwine be no funel an MissScarlett say it be termorrer mawnin an he say dar be shootin. An all de kinfolks in de house an

all de neighbors already gabblin bout it lak a flock of guinea hens, an Ah thought of you, MissMelly. You got ter come hep us.

Oh, Mammy, I couldnt intrude!

Ef you kain, who kin?

But what could I do, Mammy?

Miss Melly, Ah doan know. But you kin do sumpin. You kin talk ter Mist Rhett an maybe helissen ter you. He set a gret sto by you, Miss Melly. Maybe you doan know it, but he do. Ah donehear him say time an agin, you is de onlies gret lady he knows.

But

Melanie rose to her feet, confused, her heart quailing at the thought of confronting Rhett. Thethought of arguing with a man as grief crazed as the one Mammy depicted made her go cold. Thethought of entering that brightly lighted room where lay the little girl she loved so much wrung herheart. What could she do? What could she say to Rhett that would ease his grief and bring himback to reason? For a moment she stood irresolute and through the closed door came the sound ofher boys treble laughter. Like a cold knife in her heart came the thought of him dead. Suppose herBeau were lying upstairs, his little body cold and still, his merry laughter hushed.

Oh, she cried aloud, in fright, and in her mind she clutched him close to her heart. She knewhow Rhett felt. If Beau were dead, how could she put him away, alone with the wind and the rainand the darkness?

Oh! Poor, poor Captain Butler! she cried. Ill go to him now, right away.

She sped back to the dining room, said a few soft words to Ashley and surprised her little boy byhugging him close to her and kissing his blond curls passionately.

She left the house without a hat, her dinner napkin still clutched in her hand, and the pace she setwas hard for Mammys old legs. Once in Scarletts front hall, she bowed briefly to the gathering inthe library, to the frightened Miss Pittypat, the stately old Mrs. Butler, Will and Suellen. She wentup the stairs swiftly, with Mammy panting behind her. For a moment, she paused before Scarlettsclosed door but Mammy hissed, Nom, doan do dat.

Down the hall Melly went, more slowly now, and stopped in front of Rhetts room. She stoodirresolutely for a moment as though she longed to take flight. Then, bracing herself, like a smallsoldier going into battle, she knocked on the door and called softly: Please let me in, CaptainButler. Its Mrs. Wilkes. I want to see Bonnie.

The door opened quickly and Mammy, shrinking back into the shadows of the hall, saw Rhetthuge and dark against the blazing background of candles. He was swaying on his feet and Mammycould smell the whisky on his breath. He looked down at Melly for a moment and then, taking herby the arm, he pulled her into the room and shut the door.

Mammy edged herself stealthily to a chair beside the door and sank into it wearily, her shapelessbody overflowing it. She sat still, weeping silently and praying. Now and then she lifted the hem ofher dress and wiped her eyes. Strain her ears as hard as she might, she could hear no words fromthe room, only a low broken humming sound.

After an interminable period, the door cracked open and Mellys face white and strained,appeared.

Bring me a pot of coffee, quickly, and some sandwiches.

When the devil drove, Mammy could be as swift as a lithe black sixteen-year-old and hercuriosity to get into Rhetts room made her work faster. But her hope turned to disappointmentwhen Melly merely opened the door a crack and took the tray. For a long time Mammy strainedher sharp ears but she could distinguish nothing except the clatter of silver on china, and themuffled soft tones of Melanies voice. Then she heard the creaking of the bed as a heavy body fellupon it and, soon after, the sound of boots dropping to the floor. After an interval, Melanie appearedin the doorway but, strive though she might, Mammy could not see past her into the room.

Melanie looked tired and there were tears glistening on her lashes but her face was serene again.

Go tell Miss Scarlett that Captain Butler is quite willing for the funeral to take place tomorrowmorning, she whispered.

Bress Gawd! ejaculated Mammy. How on uth

Dont talk so loud. Hes going to sleep. And, Mammy, tell Miss Scarlett, too, that Ill be hereall night and you bring me some coffee. Bring it here.

Ter disyere room?

Yes, I promised Captain Butler that if he would go to sleep I would sit up by her all night. Nowgo tell Miss Scarlett, so she wont worry any more.

Mammy started off down the hall, her weight shaking the floor, her relieved heart singingHallelujah! Hallelujah! She paused thoughtfully outside of Scarletts door, her mind in a fermentof thankfulness and curiosity.

How Miss Melley done it beyon me. De angels fight on her side, Ah specs. Ahll tell MissScarlett de funel termorrer but Ah specs Ah better keep hid dat Miss Melly settin up wid Lil Miss.

Miss Scarlett ain gwine lak dat a-tall.

Chapter 60

SOMETHING WAS WRONG with the world, a somber, frightening wrongness that pervadedeverything like a dark impenetrable mist, stealthily closing around Scarlett. This wrongness wenteven deeper than Bonnies death, for now the first unbearable anguish was fading into resigned acceptanceof her loss. Yet this eerie sense of disaster to come persisted, as though something blackand hooded stood just at her shoulder, as though the ground beneath her feet might turn toquicksand as she trod upon it.

She had never before known this type of fear. All her life her feet had been firmly planted incommon sense and the only things she had ever feared had been the things she could see, injury,hunger, poverty, loss of Ashleys love. Unanalytical she was trying to analyze now and with nosuccess. She had lost her dearest child but she could stand that, somehow, as she had stood othercrushing losses. She had her health, she had as much money as she could wish and she still hadAshley, though she saw less and less of him these days. Even the constraint which had beenbetween them since the day of Melanies ill-starred surprise party did not worry her, for she knewit would pass. No, her fear was not of pain or hunger or loss of love. Those fears had neverweighed her down as this feeling of wrongness was doingthis blighting fear that was oddly likethat which she knew in her old nightmare, a thick, swimming mist through which she ran withbursting heart, a lost child seeking a haven that was hidden from her.

She remembered how Rhett had always been able to laugh her out of her fears. She rememberedthe comfort of his broad brown chest and his strong arms. And so she turned to him with eyes thatreally saw him for the first time in weeks. And the change she saw shocked her. This man was notgoing to laugh, nor was he going to comfort her.

For some time after Bonnies death she had been too angry with him, too preoccupied with hergrief to do more than speak politely in front of the servants. She had been too busyreme(own) mbering the swift running patter of Bonnies feet and her bubbling laugh to think that he, too,might be remembering and with pain even greater than her own. Throughout these weeks they hadmet and spoken as courteously as strangers meeting in the impersonal walls of a hotel, sharing thesame roof, the same table, but never sharing the thoughts of each other.

Now that she was frightened and lonely, she would have broken through this barrier if she could, but she found that he was holding her at arms length, as though he wished to have no words withher that went beneath the surface. Now that her anger was fading she wanted to tell him that sheheld him guiltless of Bonnies death. She wanted to cry in his arms and say that she, too, had beenoverly proud of the childs horsemanship, overly indulgent to her wheedlings. Now she wouldwillingly have humbled herself and admitted that she had only hurled that accusation at him out ofher misery, hoping by hurting him to alleviate her own hurt. But there never seemed an opportunemoment. He looked at her out of black blank eyes that made no opportunity for her to speak. Andapologies, once postponed, became harder and harder to make, and finally impossible.

She wondered why this should be. Rhett was her husband and between them there was theunbreakable bond of two people who have shared the same bed, begotten and borne a loved childand seen that child, too soon, laid away in the dark. Only in the arms of the father of that childcould she find comfort, in the exchange of memories and grief that might hurt at first but wouldhelp to heal. But, now, as matters stood between them, she would as soon go to the arms of acomplete stranger.

He was seldom at home. When they did sit down to supper together, he was usually drunk. Hewas not drinking as he had formerly, becoming increasingly more polished and biting as the liquortook hold of him, saving amusing, malicious things that made her laugh in spite of herself. Now hewas silently, morosely drunk and, as the evenings progressed, soddenly drunk. Sometimes, in theearly hours of the dawn, she heard him ride into the back yard and beat on the door of the servants

house so that Pork might help him up the back stairs and put him to bed. Put him to bed! Rhettwho had always drunk others under the table without turning a hair and then put them to bed.

He was untidy now, where once he had been well groomed, and it took all Porks scandalizedarguing even to make him change his linen before supper. Whisky was showing in his face and thehard line of his long jaw was being obscured under an unhealthy bloat and puffs rising under hisbloodshot eyes. His big body with its hard swelling muscles looked soft and slack and his waistline began to thicken.

Often he did not come home at all or even send word that he would be away overnight. Ofcourse, he might be snoring drunkenly in some room above a saloon, but Scarlett always believedthat he was at Belle Watlings house on these occasions. Once she had seen Belle in a store, acoarse overblown woman now, with most of her good looks gone. But, for all her paint and flashydomes, she was buxom and almost motherly looking. Instead of dropping her eyes or glaringdefiantly, as did other light women when confronted by ladies, Belle gave her stare for stare,searching her face with an intent, almost pitying look that brought a flush to Scarletts cheek.

But she could not accuse him now, could not rage at him, demand fidelity or try to shame him,any more than she could bring herself to apologize for accusing him of Bonnies death. She wasclutched by a bewildered apathy, an unhappiness that she could not understand, an unhappinessthat went deeper than anything she had ever known. She was lonely and she could never rememberbeing so lonely before. Perhaps she had never had the time to be very lonely until now. She waslonely and afraid and there was no one to whom she could turn, no one except Melanie. For now,even Mammy, her mainstay, had gone back to Tara. Gone permanently.

Mammy gave no explanation for her departure. Her tired old eyes looked sadly at Scarlett when she asked for the train fare home. To Scarletts tears and pleading that she stay, Mammy onlyanswered: Look ter me lak Miss Ellen say ter me: Mammy, come home. Yo wuk done finish. SoAhs gwine home.

Rhett, who had listened to the talk, gave Mammy the money and patted her arm.

Youre right, Mammy. Miss Ellen is right. Your work here is done. Go home. Let me know ifyou ever need anything. And as Scarlett broke into renewed indignant commands: Hush, youfool! Let her go! Why should anyone want to stay in this housenow?

There was such a savage bright glitter in his eyes when he spoke that Scarlett shrank from him,frightened.

Dr. Meade, do you think he cancan have lost his mind? she questioned afterwards, driven tothe doctor by her own sense of helplessness.

No, said the doctor, but hes drinking like a fish and will kill himself if he keeps it up. Heloved the child, Scarlett, and I guess he drinks to forget about her. Now, my advice to you, Miss, isto give him another baby just as quickly as you can.

Hah! thought Scarlett bitterly, as she left his office. That was easier said than done. She wouldgladly have another child, several children, if they would take that look out of Rhetts eyes and fillup the aching spaces in her own heart. A boy who had Rhetts dark handsomeness and another littlegirl. Oh, for another girl, pretty and gay and willful and full of laughter, not like the giddy-brainedElla. Why, oh, why couldnt God have taken Ella if He had to take one of her children? Ella was nocomfort to her, now that Bonnie was gone. But Rhett did not seem to want any other children. Atleast he never came to her bedroom, though now the door was never locked and usually invitinglyajar. He did not seem to care. He did not seem to care for anything now except whisky and thatblowzy red-haired woman.

He was bitter now, where he had been pleasantly jeering, brutal where his thrusts had once beentempered with humor. After Bonnie died, many of the good ladies of the neighborhood who hadbeen won over to him by his charming manners with his daughter were anxious to show himkindness. They stopped him on the street to give him their sympathy and spoke to him from overtheir hedges, saying that they understood. But now that Bonnie, the reason for his good manners,was gone the manners went to. He cut the ladies and their well-meant condolences off shortly,rudely.

But, oddly enough, the ladies were not offended. They understood, or thought they understood.

When he rode home in the twilight almost too drunk to stay in the saddle, scowling at those whospoke to him, the ladies said Poor thing! and redoubled their efforts to be kind and gentle. Theyfelt very sorry for him, broken hearted and riding home to no better comfort than ScarlettEverybody knew how cold and heartless she was. Everybody was appalled at the seeming easewith which she had recovered from Bonnies death, never realizing or caring to realize the effortthat lay behind that seeming recovery. Rhett had the towns tenderest sympathy and he neitherknew nor cared. Scarlett had the towns dislike and, for once, she would have welcomed thesympathy of old friends.

Now, none of her old friends came to the house, except Aunt Pitty, Melanie and Ashley. Only the new friends came calling in their shining carriages, anxious to tell her of their sympathy, eager todivert her with gossip about other new friends in whom she was not at all interested. All thesenew people, strangers, every one! They didnt know her. They would never know her. They hadno realization of what her life had been before she reached her present safe eminence in hermansion on Peachtree Street. They didnt care to talk about what their lives had been before theyattained stiff brocades and victorias with fine teams of horses. They didnt know of her struggles,her privations, all the things that made this great house and pretty clothes and silver and receptionsworth having. They didnt know. They didnt care, these people from God-knows-where whoseemed to live always on the surface of things, who had no common memories of war and hungerand fighting, who had no common roots going down into the same red earth.

Now in her loneliness, she would have liked to while away the afternoons with Maybelle orFanny or Mrs. El-sing or Mrs. Whiting or even that redoubtable old warrior, Mrs. Merriwether. OrMrs. Bonnell oror any of her old friends and neighbors. For they knew. They had known warand terror and fire, had seen dear ones dead before their time; they had hungered and been ragged,had lived with the wolf at the door. And they had rebuilt fortune from ruin.

It would be a comfort to sit with Maybelle, remembering that Maybelle had buried a baby, deadin the mad flight before Sherman. There would be solace in Fannys presence, knowing that sheand Fanny both had lost husbands in the black days of martial law. It would be grim fun to laughwith Mrs. Elsing, recalling the old ladys face as she flogged her horse through Five Points the dayAtlanta fell, her loot from the commissary jouncing from her carriage. It would be pleasant tomatch stories with Mrs. Merriwether, now secure on the proceeds of her bakery, pleasant to say:

Do you remember how bad things were right after the surrender? Do you remember when wedidnt know where our next pair of shoes was coming from? And look at us now!

Yes, it would be pleasant. Now she understood why when two ex-Confederates met, they talkedof the war with so much relish, with pride, with nostalgia. Those had been days that tried theirhearts but they had come through them. They were veterans. She was a veteran too, but she had nocronies with whom she could refight old battles. Oh, to be with her own kind of people again,those people who had been through the same things and knew how they hurtand yet how great apart of you they were!

But, somehow, these people had slipped away. She realized that it was her own fault. She hadnever cared until nownow that Bonnie was dead and she was lonely and afraid and she sawacross her shining dinner table a swarthy sodden stranger disintegrating under her eyes.

Chapter 61

SCARLETT WAS in Marietta when Rhetts urgent telegram came. There was a train leaving forAtlanta in ten minutes and she caught it, carrying no baggage except her reticule and leaving Wadeand Ella at the hotel with Prissy.

Atlanta was only twenty miles away but the train crawled interminably through the wet earlyautumn afternoon, stopping at every bypath for passengers. Panic stricken at Rhetts message, madfor speed, Scarlett almost screamed at every halt. Down the road lumbered the train through forests faintly, tiredly gold, past red hillsides still scarred with serpentine breastworks, past old battery emplacementsand weed-grown craters, down the road over which Johnstons men had retreated sobitterly, fighting every step of the way. Each station, each crossroad the conductor called was thename of a battle, the site of a skirmish. Once they would have stirred Scarlett to memories of terrorbut now she had no thought for them.

Rhetts message had been:

Mrs. Wilkes ill. Come home immediately.

Twilight had fallen when the train pulled into Atlanta and a light misting rain obscured the town.

The gas street lamps glowed dully, blobs of yellow in the fog. Rhett was waiting for her at thedepot with the carriage. The very sight of his face frightened her more than his telegram. She hadnever seen it so expressionless before.

She isnt she cried.

No. Shes still alive. Rhett assisted her into the carriage. To Mrs. Wilkes house and as fast asyou can go, he ordered the coachman.

Whats the matter with her? I didnt know she was ill. She looked all right last week. Did shehave an accident? Oh, Rhett, it isnt really as serious as you

Shes dying, said Rhett and his voice had no more expression than his face. She wants to seeyou.

Not Melly! Oh, not Melly! Whats happened to her?

Shes had a miscarriage.

Aa-misbut, Rhett, she Scarlett floundered. This information on top of the horror of hisannouncement took her breath away.

You did not know she was going to have a baby?

She could not even shake her head.

Ah, well. I suppose not. I dont think she told anyone. She wanted it to be a surprise. But Iknew.

You knew? But surely she didnt tell you!

She didnt have to tell me. I knew. Shes been sohappy these last two months I knew itcouldnt mean anything else.

But Rhett, the doctor said it would kill her to have another baby!

It has killed her, said Rhett. And to the coachman: For Gods sake, cant you drive faster?

But, Rhett, she cant be dying! II didnt and I

She hasnt your strength. Shes never had any strength. Shes never had anything but heart.

The carriage rocked to a standstill in front of the flat little house and Rhett handed her out.

Trembling, frightened, a sudden feeling of loneliness upon her, she clasped his arm.

Youre coming in, Rhett?

No, he said and got back into the carriage.

She flew up the front steps, across the porch and threw open the door. There, in the yellowlamplight were Ashley, Aunt Pitty and India. Scarlett thought: Whats India doing here? Melanietold her never to set foot in this house again. The three rose at the sight of her, Aunt Pitty bitingher trembling lips to still them, India staring at her, grief stricken and without hate. Ashley lookeddull as a sleepwalker and, as he came to her and put his hand upon her arm, he spoke like asleepwalker.

She asked for you, he said. She asked for you.

Can I see her now? She turned toward the closed door of Melanies room.

No. Dr. Meade is in there now. Im glad youve come, Scarlett

I came as quickly as I could. Scarlett shed her bonnet and her cloak. The train She isntreally Tell me, shes better, isnt she, Ashley? Speak to me! Dont look like that! She isnt really

She kept asking for you, said Ashley and looked her in the eyes. And, in his eyes she saw theanswer to her question. For a moment, her heart stood still and then a queer fear, stronger thananxiety, stronger than grief, began to beat in her breast. It cant be true, she thought vehemently,trying to push back the fear. Doctors make mistakes. I wont think its true. I cant let myself thinkits true. Ill scream if I do. I must think of something else.

I dont believe it! she cried stormily, looking into the three drawn faces as though defyingthem to contradict her. And why didnt Melanie tell me? Id never have gone to Marietta if Idknown!

Ashleys eyes awoke and were tormented.

She didnt tell anyone, Scarlett, especially not you. She was afraid youd scold her if you knew.

She wanted to wait threetill she thought it safe and sure and then surprise you all and laugh andsay how wrong the doctors had been. And she was so happy. You know how she was about babieshow much shes wanted a little girl. And everything went so well untiland then for no reasonat all

The door of Melanies room opened quietly and Dr. Meade came out into the hall, shutting thedoor behind him. He stood for a moment, his gray beard sunk on his chest, and looked at thesuddenly frozen four. His gaze fell last on Scarlett. As he came toward her, she saw that there wasgrief in his eyes and also dislike and contempt that flooded her frightened heart with guilt.

So you finally got here, he said.

Before she could answer, Ashley started toward the closed door.

Not you, yet, said the doctor. She wants to speak to Scarlett.

Doctor, said India, putting a hand on his sleeve. Though her voice was toneless, it plead moreloudly than words. Let me see her for a moment. Ive been here since this morning, waiting, butshe Let me see her for a moment. I want to tell hermust tell herthat I was wrong about something.

She did not look at Ashley or Scarlett as she spoke, but Dr. Meade allowed his cold glance to fallon Scarlett.

Ill see, Miss India, he said briefly. But only if youll give me your word not to use up herstrength telling her you were wrong. She knows you were wrong and it will only worry her to hearyou apologize.

Pitty began, timidly: Please, Dr. Meade

Miss Pitty, you know youd scream and faint.

Pitty drew up her stout little body and gave the doctor glance for glance. Her eyes were dry andthere was dignity in every curve.

Well, all right, honey, a little later, said the doctor, more kindly. Come, Scarlett.

They tiptoed down the hall to the closed door and the doctor put his hand on Scarletts shoulderin a hard grip.

Now, Miss, he whispered briefly, no hysterics and no deathbed confessions from you or,before God, I will wring your neck! Dont give me any of your innocent stares. You know what Imean. Miss Melly is going to die easily and you arent going to ease your own conscience bytelling her anything about Ashley. Ive never harmed a woman yet, but if you say anything nowyoull answer to me.

He opened the door before she could answer, pushed her into the room and closed the doorbehind her. The little room, cheaply furnished in black walnut, was in semi-darkness, the lampshaded with a newspaper. It was as small and prim a room as a schoolgirls, the narrow little low-backed bed, the plain net curtains looped back, the clean faded rag rugs on the floor, were sodifferent from the lavishness of Scarletts own bedroom with its towering carved furniture, pinkbrocade draperies and rose-strewn carpet.

Melanie lay in the bed, her figure under the counterpane shrunken and flat like a little girls.

Two black braids fell on either side of her face and her closed eyes were sunken in twin purplecircles. At the sight of her Scarlett stood transfixed, leaning against the door. Despite the gloom ofthe room, she could see that Melanies face was of a waxy yellow color. It was drained of lifesblood and there was a pinched look about the nose. Until that moment, Scarlett had hoped Dr.

Meade was mistaken. But now she knew. In the hospitals during the war she had seen too manyfaces wearing this pinched look not to know what it inevitably presaged.

Melanie was dying, but for a moment Scarletts mind refused to take it in. Melanie could notdie. It was impossible for her to die. God wouldnt let her die when she, Scarlett, needed her somuch. Never before had it occurred to her that she needed Melanie. But now, the truth surged in,down to the deepest recesses of her soul. She had relied on Melanie, even as she had relied uponherself, and she had never known it. Now, Melanie was dying and Scarlett knew she could not getalong without her. Now, as she tiptoed across the room toward the quiet figure, panic clutching ather heart, she knew that Melanie had been her sword and her shield, her comfort and her strength.

I must hold her! I cant let her get away! she thought and sank beside the bed with a rustle of skirts. Hastily she grasped the limp hand lying on the coverlet and was frightened anew by its chill.

Its me, Melly, she said.

Melanies eyes opened a slit and then, as if having satisfied herself that it was really Scarlett, sheclosed them again. After a pause she drew a breath and whispered:

Promise me?

Oh, anything!

Beaulook after him.

Scarlett could only nod, a strangled feeling in her throat, and she gently pressed the hand sheheld by way of assent.

I give him to you. There was the faintest trace of a smile. I gave him to you, once beforemember?before he was born.

Did she remember? Could she ever forget that time? Almost as clearly as if that dreadful dayhad returned, she could feel the stifling heat of the September noon, remembering her terror of theYankees, hear the tramp of the retreating troops, recall Melanies voice begging her to take thebaby should she dieremember, too, how she had hated Melanie that day and hoped that shewould die.

Ive killed her, she thought, in superstitious agony. I wished so often she would die and Godheard me and is punishing me.

Oh, Melly, dont talk like that! You know youll pull through this

No. Promise.

Scarlett gulped.

You know I promise. Ill treat him like he was my own boy.

College? asked Melanies fault flat voice.

Oh, yes! The university and Harvard and Europe and anything he wantsandanda ponyand music lessons Oh, please, Melly, do try! Do make an effort!

The silence fell again and on Melanies face there were signs of a struggle to gather strength tospeak.

Ashley, she said. Ashley and you Her voice faltered into stillness.

At the mention of Ashleys name, Scarletts heart stood still, cold as granite within her. Melaniehad known all the time. Scarlett dropped her head on the coverlet and a sob that would not risecaught her throat with a cruel hand. Melanie knew. Scarlett was beyond shame now, beyond anyfeeling save a wild remorse that she had hurt this gentle creature throughout the long years.

Melanie had knownand yet, she had remained her loyal friend. Oh, if she could only live thoseyears over again! She would never even let her eyes meet those of Ashley.

O God, she prayed rapidly, do, please, let her live! Ill make it up to her. Ill be so good toher. Ill never even speak to Ashley again as long as I live, if Youll only let her get well!

Ashley, said Melanie feebly and her fingers readied out to touch Scarletts bowed head. Herthumb and forefinger tugged with no more strength than that of a baby at Scarletts hair. Scarlettknew what that meant, knew Melanie wanted her to look up. But she could not, could not meetMelanies eyes and read that knowledge in them.

Ashley, Melanie whispered again and Scarlett gripped herself. When she looked God in theface on the Day of Judgment and read her sentence in His eyes, it would not be as bad as this. Hersoul cringed but she raised her head.

She saw only the same dark loving eyes, sunken and drowsy with death, the same tender mouthtiredly fighting pain for breath. No reproach was there, no accusation and no fearonly an anxietythat she might not find strength for words.

For a moment Scarlett was too stunned to even feel relief. Then, as she held Melanies handmore closely, a flood of warm gratitude to God swept over her and, for the first time since herchildhood, she said a humble, unselfish prayer.

Thank You, God. I know Im not worth it but thank You for not letting her know.

What about Ashley, Melly?

Youlllook after him?

Oh, yes.

He catches coldso easily.

There was a pause.

Look afterhis businessyou understand?

Yes, I understand. I will.

She made a great effort.

Ashley isntpractical.

Only death could have forced that disloyalty from Melanie.

Look after him, Scarlettbutdont ever let him know.

Ill look after him and the business too, and Ill never let him know. Ill just kind of suggestthings to him.

Melanie managed a small smile but it was a triumphant one as her eyes met Scarletts again.

Their glance sealed the bargain that the protection of Ashley Wilkes from a too harsh world waspassing from one woman to another and that Ashleys masculine pride should never be humbled bythis knowledge.

Now the struggle went out of the tired face as though with Scarletts promise, ease had come toher.

Youre so smartso bravealways been so good to me

At these words, the sob came freely to Scarletts throat and she clapped her hand over hermouth. Now, she was going to bawl like a child and cry out: Ive been a devil! Ive wronged you so! I never did anything for you! It was all for Ashley.

She rose to her feet abruptly, sinking her teeth into her thumb to regain her control. Rhettswords came back to her again, She loves you. Let that be your cross. Well, the cross was heaviernow. It was bad enough that she had tried by every art to take Ashley from her. But now it wasworse that Melanie, who had trusted her blindly through life, was laying the same love and trust onher in death. No, she could not speak. She could not even say again: Make an effort to live. Shemust let her go easily, without a struggle, without tears, without sorrow.

The door opened slightly and Dr. Meade stood on the threshold, beckoning imperiously. Scarlettbent over the bed, choking back her tears and taking Melanies hand, laid it against her cheek.

Good night, she said, and her voice was steadier than she thought it possibly could be.

Promise me came the whisper, very softly now.

Anything, darling.

Captain Butlerbe kind to him. Heloves you so.

Rhett? thought Scarlett, bewildered, and the words meant nothing to her.

Yes, indeed, she said automatically and, pressing a light kiss on the hand, laid it back on thebed.

Tell the ladies to come in immediately, whispered the doctor as she passed through the door.

Through blurred eyes she saw India and Pitty follow the doctor into the room, holding theirskirts close to their sides to keep them from rustling. The door closed behind them and the housewas still. Ashley was nowhere to be seen. Scarlett leaned her head against the wall, like a naughtychild in a corner, and rubbed her aching throat.

Behind that door, Melanie was going and, with her, the strength upon which she had reliedunknowingly for so many years. Why, oh, why, had she not realized before this how much sheloved and needed Melanie? But who would have thought of small plain Melanie as a tower ofstrength? Melanie who was shy to tears before strangers, timid about raising her voice in anopinion of her own, fearful of the disapproval of old ladies, Melanie who lacked the courage to sayBoo to a goose? And yetScarletts mind went back through the years to the still, hot noon at Tara when gray smokecurled above a blue-clad body and Melanie stood at the top of the stairs with Charles saber in herhand. Scarlett remembered that she had thought at the time: How silly! Melly couldnt even heftthat sword! But now she knew that had the necessity arisen, Melanie would have charged downthose stairs and killed the Yankeeor been killed herself.

Yes, Melanie had been there that day with a sword in her small hand, ready to do battle for her.

And now, as Scarlett looked sadly back, she realized that Melanie had always been there beside herwith a sword in her hand, unobtrusive as her own shadow, loving her, fighting for her with blindpassionate loyalty, fighting Yankees, fire, hunger, poverty, public opinion and even her belovedblood kin.

Scarlett felt her courage and self-confidence ooze from her as she realized that the sword which had flashed between her and the world was sheathed forever.

Melly is the only woman friend I ever had, she thought forlornly, the only woman exceptMother who really loved me. Shes like Mother, too. Everyone who knew her has clung to herskirts.

Suddenly it was as if Ellen were lying behind that closed door, leaving the world for a secondtime. Suddenly she was standing at Tara again with the world about her ears, desolate with theknowledge that she could not face life without the terrible strength of the weak, the gentle, thetender hearted.

She stood in the hall, irresolute, frightened, and the glaring light of the fire in the sitting roomthrew tall dim shadows on the walls about her. The house was utterly still and the stillness soakedinto her like a fine chill rain. Ashley! Where was Ashley?

She went toward the sitting room seeking him like a cold animal seeking the fire but he was notthere. She must find him. She had discovered Melanies strength and her dependence on it only tolose it in the moment of discovery but there was still Ashley left. There was Ashley who wasstrong and wise and comforting. In Ashley and his love lay strength upon which to lay herweakness, courage to bolster her fear, ease for her sorrow.

He must be in his room, she thought, and tiptoeing down the hall, she knocked softly. There wasno answer, so she pushed the door open. Ashley was standing in front of the dresser, looking at apair of Melanies mended gloves. First he picked up one and looked at it, as though he had neverseen it before. Then he laid it down gently, as though it were made of glass, and picked up theother one.

She said:  Ashley! in a trembling voice and he turned slowly and looked at her. The drowsyaloofness had gone from his gray eyes and they were wide and unmasked. In them she saw fearthat matched her own fear, helplessness weaker than her own, bewilderment more profound thanshe would ever know. The feeling of dread which had possessed her in the hall deepened as shesaw his face. She went toward him.

Im frightened, she said. Oh, Ashley, hold me. Im so frightened!

He made no move to her but stared, gripping the glove tightly in both hands. She put a hand onhis arm and whispered: What is it?

His eyes searched her intently, hunting, hunting desperately for something he did not find.

Finally he spoke and his voice was not his own.

I was wanting you, he said. I was going to run and find yourun like a child wantingcomfortand I find a child, more frightened, running to me.

Not youyou cant be frightened, she cried. Nothing has ever frightened you. But IYouve always been so strong

If Ive ever been strong, it was because she was behind me, he said, his voice breaking, and helooked down at the glove and smoothed the fingers. Andandall the strength I ever had isgoing with her.

There was such a note of wild despair in his low voice that she dropped her hand from his armand stepped back. And in the heavy silence that fell between them, she felt that she reallyunderstood him for the first time in her life.

Why she said slowly, why, Ashley, you love her, dont you?

He spoke as with an effort.

She is the only dream I ever had that lived and breathed and did not die in the face of reality.

Dreams! she thought, an old irritation stirring. Always dreams with him! Never commonsense!

With a heart that was heavy and a little bitter, she said: Youve been such a fool, Ashley. Whycouldnt you see that she was worth a million of me?

Scarlett, please! If you only knew what Ive gone through since the doctor

What youve gone through! Dont you think that I Oh, Ashley, you should have known,years ago, that you loved her and not me! Why didnt you! Everything would have been sodifferent, so Oh, you should have realized and not kept me dangling with all your talk abouthonor and sacrifice! If youd told me, years ago, Id have It would have killed me but I couldhave stood it somehow. But you wait till now, till Mellys dying, to find it out and now its too lateto do anything. Oh, Ashley, men are supposed to know such thingsnot women! You should haveseen so clearly that you loved her all the time and only wanted me likelike Rhett wants thatWatling woman!

He winced at her words but his eyes still met hers, imploring silence, comfort. Every line of hisface admitted the truth of her words. The very droop of his shoulders showed that his own self-castigation was more cruel than any she could give. He stood silent before her, clutching the glovethough it were an understanding hand and, in the stillness that followed her words, herind(as) ignation fell away and pity, tinged with contempt, took its place. Her conscience smote her. Shewas kicking a beaten and defenseless manand she had promised Melanie that she would lookafter him.

And just as soon as I promised her, I said mean, hurting things to him and theres no need forme to say them or for anyone to say them. He knows the truth and its killing him, she thoughtdesolately. Hes not grown up. Hes a child, like me, and hes sick with fear at losing her. Mellyknew how it would beMelly knew him far better than I do. Thats why she said look after himand Beau, in the same breath. How can Ashley ever stand this? I can stand it. I can stand anything.

Ive had to stand so much. But he canthe cant stand anything without her.

Forgive me, darling, she said gently, putting out her arms. I know what you must besuffering. But remember, she doesnt know anythingshe never even suspected God was thatgood to us.

He came to her quickly and his arms went round her blindly. She tiptoed to bring her warmcheek comfortingly against his and with one hand she smoothed the back of his hair.

Dont cry, sweet. Shed want you to be brave. Shell want to see you in a moment and you mustbe brave. She mustnt see that youve been crying. It would worry her.

He held her in a grip that made breathing difficult and his choking voice was in her ear.

What will I do? I cantI cant live without her!

I cant either, she thought, shuddering away from the picture of the long years to come,without Melanie. But she caught herself in a strong grasp. Ashley was depending on her, Melaniewas depending on her. As once before, in the moonlight at Tara, drunk, exhausted, she had thought:

Burdens are for shoulders strong enough to carry them. Well, her shoulders were strong andAshleys were not. She squared her shoulders for the load and with a calmness she was far fromfeeling, kissed his wet cheek without fever or longing or passion, only with cool gentleness.

We shall managesomehow, she said.

A door opened with sudden violence into the hall and Dr. Meade called with sharp urgency:

Ashley! Quick!

My God! Shes gone! thought Scarlett And Ashley didnt get to tell her good-by! But maybe

Hurry! she cried aloud, giving him a push, for he stood staring like one stunned. Hurry!

She pulled open the door and motioned him through. Galvanized by her words, he ran into thehall, the glove still clasped closely in his hand. She heard his rapid steps for a moment and then theclosing of a door.

She said, My God! again and walking slowly to the bed, sat down upon it and dropped herhead in her hands. She was suddenly tired, more tired than she had ever been in all her life. Withthe sound of the closing door, the strain under which she had been laboring, the strain which hadgiven her strength, suddenly snapped. She felt exhausted in body and drained of emotions. Nowshe felt no sorrow or remorse, no fear or amazement. She was tired and her mind ticked awaydully, mechanically, as the clock on the mantel.

Out of the dullness, one thought arose. Ashley did not love her and had never really loved herand the knowledge did not hurt. It should hurt. She should be desolate, broken hearted, ready toscream at fate. She had relied upon his love for so long. It had upheld her through so many darkplaces. Yet, there the truth was. He did not love her and she did not care. She did not care becauseshe did not love him. She did not love him and so nothing he could do or say could hurt her.

She lay down on the bed and put her head on the pillow tiredly. Useless to try to combat theidea, useless to say to herself: But I do love him. Ive loved him for years. Love cant change toapathy in a minute.

But it could change and it had changed.

He never really existed at all, except in my imagination, she thought wearily. I lovedsomething I made up, something thats just as dead as Melly is. I made a pretty suit of clothes andfell in love with it. And when Ashley came riding along, so handsome, so different, I put that suiton him and made him wear it whether it fitted him or not. And I wouldnt see what he really was. Ikept on loving the pretty clothesand not him at all.

Now she could look back down the long years and see herself in green flowered dimity, standing in the sunshine at Tara, thrilled by the young horseman with his blond hair shining like a silverhelmet. She could see so clearly now that he was only a childish fancy, no more important reallythan her spoiled desire for the aquamarine earbobs she had coaxed out of Gerald. For, once sheowned the earbobs, they had lost their value, as everything except money lost its value once it washers. And so he, too, would have become cheap if, in those first far-away days, she had ever hadthe satisfaction of refusing to marry him. If she had ever had him at her mercy, seen him grownpassionate, importunate, jealous, sulky, pleading, like the other boys, the wild infatuation whichhad possessed her would have passed, blowing away as lightly as mist before sunshine and lightwind when she met a new man.

What a fool Ive been, she thought bitterly. And now Ive got to pay for it What Ive wishedfor so often has happened. Ive wished Melly was dead so I could have him. And now shes deadand Ive got him and I dont want him. His damned honor will make him ask me if I want todivorce Rhett and marry him. Marry him? I wouldnt have him on a silver platter! But, just thesame Ive got him round my neck for the rest of my life. As long as I live Ill have to look afterhim and see that he doesnt starve and that people dont hurt his feelings. Hell be just anotherchild, clinging to my skirts. Ive lost my lover and Ive got another child. And if I hadnt promisedMelly, IdI wouldnt care if I never saw him again.

Chapter 62

SHE HEARD whispering voices outside, and going to the door she saw the frightened negroesstanding in the back hall, Dilcey with her arms sagging under the heavy weight of the sleepingBeau, Uncle Peter crying, and Cookie wiping her wide wet face on her apron. All three looked ather, dumbly asking what they were to do now. She looked up the hall toward the sitting room andsaw India and Aunt Pitty standing speechless, holding each others hands and, for once, India hadlost her stiff-necked look. Like the negroes, they looked imploringly at her, expecting her to giveinstructions. She walked into the sitting room and the two women closed about her.

Oh, Scarlett, what began Aunt Pitty, her fat, childs mouth shaking.

Dont speak to me or Ill scream, said Scarlett. Overwrought nerves brought sharpness to hervoice and her hands clenched at her sides. The thought of speaking of Melanie now, of making theinevitable arrangements that follow a death made her throat tighten. I dont want a word out ofeither of you.

At the authoritative note in her voice, they fell back, helpless hurt looks on their faces. Imustnt cry in front of them, she thought. I mustnt break now or theyll begin crying too, andthen the darkies will begin screaming and well all go mad. I must pull myself together. Theres somuch Ill have to do. See the undertaker and arrange the funeral and see that the house is clean andbe here to talk to people wholl cry on my neck. Ashley cant do them. Ive got to do them. Oh,what a weary load! Its always been a weary load and always some one elses load!

She looked at the dazed hurt faces of India and Pitty and contrition swept her. Melanie wouldnot like her to be so sharp with those who loved her.

Im sorry I was cross, she said, speaking with difficulty. Its just that IIm sorry I was cross, Auntie. Im going out on the porch for a minute. Ive got to be alone. Then Ill come backand well

She patted Aunt Pitty and went swiftly by her to the front door, knowing if she stayed in thisroom another minute her control would crack. She had to be alone. And she had to cry or her heartwould break.

She stepped onto the dark porch and closed the door behind her and the moist night air was coolupon her face. The rain had ceased and there was no sound except for the occasional drip of waterfrom the eaves. The world was wrapped in a thick mist, a faintly chill mist that bore on its breaththe smell of the dying year. All the houses across the street were dark except one, and the lightfrom a lamp in the window, falling into the street, struggled feebly with the fog, golden particlesfloating in its rays. It was as if the whole world were enveloped in an unmoving blanket of graysmoke. And the whole world was still.

She leaned her head against one of the uprights of the porch and prepared to cry but no tearscame. This was a calamity too deep for tears. Her body shook. There still reverberated in her mindthe crashes of the two impregnable citadels of her life, thundering to dust about her ears. She stoodfor a while, trying to summon up her old charm: Ill think of all this tomorrow when I can stand itbetter. But the charm had lost its potency. She had to think of two things, nowMelanie and howmuch she loved and needed her; Ashley and the obstinate blindness that had made her refuse to seehim as he really was. And she knew that thoughts of them would hurt just as much tomorrow andall the tomorrows of her life.

I cant go back in there and talk to them now, she thought. I cant face Ashley tonight andcomfort him. Not tonight! Tomorrow morning Ill come early and do the things I must do, say thecomforting things I must say. But not tonight. I cant. Im going home.

Home was only five blocks away. She would not wait for the sobbing Peter to harness thebuggy, would not wait for Dr. Meade to drive her home. She could not endure the tears of the one,the silent condemnation of the other. She went swiftly down the dark front steps without her coator bonnet and into the misty night. She rounded the corner and started up the long hill towardPeachtree Street, walking in a still wet world, and even her footsteps were as noiseless as a dream.

As she went up the hill, her chest tight with tears that would not come, there crept over her anunreal feeling, a feeling that she had been in this same dim chill place before, under a like set ofcircumstancesnot once but many times before. How silly, she thought uneasily, quickening hersteps. Her nerves were playing her tricks. But the feeling persisted, stealthily pervading her mind.

She peered about her uncertainly and the feeling grew, eerie but familiar, and her head went upsharply like an animal scenting danger. Its just that Im worn out, she tried to soothe herself. Andthe nights so queer, so misty. I never saw such thick mist before exceptexcept!

And then she knew and fear squeezed her heart. She knew now. In a hundred nightmares, shehad fled through fog like this, through a haunted country without landmarks, thick with coldcloaking mist, peopled with clutching ghosts and shadows. Was she dreaming again or was this herdream come true?

For an instant, reality went out of her and she was lost. The old nightmare feeling was sweeping her, stronger than ever, and her heart began to race. She was standing again amid death andstillness, even as she had once stood at Tara. All that mattered in the world had gone out of it, lifewas in ruins and panic howled through her heart like a cold wind. The horror that was in the mistand was the mist laid hands upon her. And she began to run. As she had run a hundred times indreams, she ran now, flying blindly she knew not where, driven by a nameless dread, seeking inthe gray mist for the safety that lay somewhere.

Up the dim street she fled, her head down, her heart hammering, the night air wet on her lips, thetrees overhead menacing. Somewhere, somewhere in this wild land of moist stillness, there was arefuge! She sped gasping up the long hill, her wet skirts wrapping coldly about her ankles, herlungs bursting, the tight-laced stays pressing her ribs into her heart.

Then before her eyes there loomed a light, a row of lights, dim and flickering but none the lessreal. In her nightmare, there had never been any lights, only gray fog. Her mind seized on thoselights. Lights meant safety, people, reality. Suddenly she stopped running, her hands clenching,struggling to pull herself out of her panic, staring intently at the row of gas lamps which hadsignaled to her brain that this was Peachtree Street, Atlanta, and not the gray world of sleep andghosts.

She sank down panting on a carriage block, clutching at her nerves as though they were ropesslipping swiftly through her hands.

I was runningrunning like a crazy person! she thought, her body shaking with lesseningfear, her thudding heart making her sick. But where was I running?

Her breath came more easily now and she sat with her hand pressed to her side and looked upPeachtree Street. There, at the top of the hill, was her own house. It looked as though everywindow bore lights, lights defying the mist to dim their brilliance. Home! It was real! She lookedat the dim far-off bulk of the house thankfully, longingly, and something like calm fell on herspirit.

Home! That was where she wanted to go. That was where she was running. Home to Rhett!

At this realization it was as though chains fell away from her and with them the fear which hadhaunted her dreams since the night she stumbled to Tara to find the world ended. At the end of theroad to Tara she had found security gone, all strength, all wisdom, all loving tenderness, allunderstanding goneall those things which, embodied in Ellen, had been the bulwark of hergirlhood. And, though she had won material safety since that night, in her dreams she was still afrightened child, searching for the lost security of that lost world.

Now she knew the haven she had sought in dreams, the place of warm safety which had alwaysbeen bidden from her in the mist. It was not Ashleyoh, never Ashley! There was no morewarmth in him than in a marsh light, no more security than in quicksand. It was RhettRhett whohad strong arms to hold her, a broad chest to pillow her tired head, jeering laughter to pull heraffairs into proper perspective. And complete understanding, because he, like her, saw truth astruth, unobstructed by impractical notions of honor, sacrifice, or high belief in human nature. Heloved her! Why hadnt she realized that he loved her, for all his taunting remarks to the contrary?

Melanie had seen it and with her last breath had said, Be kind to him.

Oh, she thought, Ashleys not the only stupidly blind person. I should have seen.

For years she had had her back against the stone wall of Rhetts love and had taken it as muchfor granted as she had taken Melanies love, flattering herself that she drew her strength fromherself alone. And even as she had realized earlier in the evening that Melanie had been beside herin her bitter campaigns against life, now she knew that silent in the background, Rhett had stood,loving her, understanding her, ready to help. Rhett at the bazaar, reading her impatience in her eyesand leading her out in the reel, Rhett helping her out of the bondage of mourning, Rhett convoyingher through the fire and explosions the night Atlanta fell, Rhett lending her the money that gaveher her start, Rhett who comforted her when she woke in the nights crying with fright from herdreamswhy, no man did such things without loving a woman to distraction!

The trees dripped dampness upon her but she did not feel it The mist swirled about her and shepaid it no heed. For when she thought of Rhett, with his swarthy face, flashing teeth and dark alerteyes, a trembling came over her.

I love him, she thought and, as always, she accepted the truth with little wonder, as a childaccepting a gift. I dont know how long Ive loved him but its true. And if it hadnt been forAshley, Id have realized it long ago. Ive never been able to see the world at all, because Ashleystood in the way.

She loved him, scamp, blackguard, without scruple or honorat least honor as Ashley saw itDamn Ashleys honor! she thought. Ashleys honor has always let me down. Yes, from the verybeginning when he kept on coming to see me, even though he knew his family expected him tomarry Melanie. Rhett has never let me down, even that dreadful night of Mellys reception whenhe ought to have wrung my neck. Even when he left me on the road the night Atlanta fell, he knewId be safe. He knew Id get through somehow. Even when he acted like he was going to make mepay to get that money from him at the Yankee camp. He wouldnt have taken me. He was justtesting me. Hes loved me all along and Ive been so mean to him. Time and again, Ive hurt himand he was too proud to show it. And when Bonnie died Oh, how could I?

She stood up straight and looked at the house on the hill. She had thought, half an hour ago, thatshe had lost everything in the world, except money, everything that made life desirable, Ellen,Gerald, Bonnie, Mammy, Melanie and Ashley. She had to lose them all to realize that she lovedRhettloved him because he was strong and unscrupulous, passionate and earthy, like herself.

Ill tell him everything, she thought. Hell understand. Hes always understood. Ill tell himwhat a fool Ive been and how much I love him and Ill make it up to him.

Suddenly she felt strong and happy. She was not afraid of the darkness or the fog and she knewwith a singing in her heart that she would never fear them again. No matter what mists might curlaround her in the future, she knew her refuge. She started briskly up the street toward home andthe blocks seemed very long. Far, far too long. She caught up her skirts to her knees and began torun lightly. But this time she was not running from fear. She was running because Rhetts armswere at the end of the street.

Chapter 63

THE FRONT DOOR was slightly ajar and she trotted, breathless, into the hall and paused for amoment under the rainbow prisms of the chandelier. For all its brightness the house was very still,not with the serene stillness of sleep but with a watchful, tired silence that was faintly ominous.

She saw at a glance that Rhett was not in the parlor or the library and her heart sank. Suppose heshould be outout with Belle or wherever it was he spent the many evenings when he did notappear at the supper table? She had not bargained on this.

She had started up the steps in search of him when she saw that the door of the dining room wasclosed. Her heart contracted a little with shame at the sight of that closed door, remembering themany nights of this last summer when Rhett had sat there alone, drinking until he was sodden andPork came to urge him to bed. That had been her fault but shed change it all. Everything was to bedifferent from now onbut, please God, dont let him be too drunk tonight. If hes too drunk hewont believe me and hell laugh at me and that will break my heart.

She quietly opened the dining-room door a crack and peered in. He was seated before the table,slumped in his chair, and a full decanter stood before him with the stopper in place, the glassunused. Thank God, he was sober! She pulled open the door, holding herself back from running tohim. But when he looked up at her, something in his gaze stopped her dead on the threshold, stilledthe words on her lips.

He looked at her steadily with dark eyes that were heavy with fatigue and there was no leapinglight in them. Though her hair was tumbling about her shoulders, her bosom heaving breathlesslyand her skirts mud splattered to the knees, his face did not change with surprise or question or hislips twist with mockery. He was sunken in his chair, his suit wrinkling untidily against histhickening waist, every line of him proclaiming the ruin of a fine body and the coarsening of astrong face. Drink and dissipation had done their work on the coin-clean profile and now it was nolonger the head of a young pagan prince on new-minted gold but a decadent, tired Caesar oncopper debased by long usage. He looked up at her as she stood there, hand on heart, lookedquietly, almost in a kindly way, that frightened her.

Come and sit down, he said. She is dead?

She nodded and advanced hesitantly toward him, uncertainty taking form in her mind at thisnew expression on his face. Without rising, he pushed back a chair with his foot and she sank intoit. She wished he had not spoken of Melanie so soon. She did not want to talk of her now, to re-livethe agony of the last hour. There was all the rest of her life in which to speak of Melanie. But itseemed to her now, driven by a fierce desire to cry: I love you, that there was only this night, thishour, in which to tell Rhett what was in her mind. But there was something in his face that stoppedher and she was suddenly ashamed to speak of love when Melanie was hardly cold.

Well, God rest her, he said heavily. She was the only completely kind person I ever knew.

Oh, Rhett! she cried miserably, for his words brought up too vividly all the kind thingsMelanie had ever done for her. Why didnt you come in with me? It was dreadfuland I neededyou so!

I couldnt have borne it, he said simply and for a moment he was silent. Then he spoke with an effort and said, softly: A very great lady.

His somber gaze went past her and in his eyes was the same look she had seen in the light of theflames the night Atlanta fell, when he told her he was going off with the retreating armythesurprise of a man who knows himself utterly, yet discovers in himself unexpected loyalties andemotions and feels a faint self-ridicule at the discovery.

His moody eyes went over her shoulder as though he saw Melanie silently passing through theroom to the door. In the look of farewell on his face there was no sorrow, no pain, only aspeculative wonder at himself, only a poignant stirring of emotions dead since boyhood, as he saidagain: A very great lady.

Scarlett shivered and the glow went from her heart, the fine warmth, the splendor which hadsent her home on winged feet. She half-grasped what was in Rhetts mind as he said farewell to theonly person in the world he respected and she was desolate again with a terrible sense of loss thatwas no longer personal. She could not wholly understand or analyze what he was feeling, but itseemed almost as if she too had been brushed by whispering skirts, touching her softly in a lastcaress. She was seeing through Rhetts eyes the passing, not of a woman but of a legendthegentle, self-effacing but steel-spined women on whom the South had builded its house in war andto whose proud and loving arms it had returned in defeatHis eyes came back to her and his voice changed. Now it was light and cool.

So shes dead. That makes it nice for you, doesnt it?

Oh, how can you say such things, she cried, stung, the quick tears coming to her eyes. Youknow how I loved her!

No, I cant say I did. Most unexpected and its to your credit, considering your passion forwhite trash, that you could appreciate her at last.

How can you talk so? Of course I appreciated her! You didnt. You didnt know her like I did!

It isnt in you to understand herhow good she was

Indeed? Perhaps not.

She thought of everybody except herselfwhy, her last words were about you.

There was a flash of genuine feeling in his eyes as he turned to her.

What did she say?

Oh, not now, Rhett.

Tell me.

His voice was cool but the hand he put on her wrist hurt. She did not want to tell, this was notthe way she had intended to lead up to the subject of her love but his hand was urgent.

She saidshe said Be kind to Captain Butler. He loves you so much.

He stared at her and dropped her wrist. His eyelids went down, leaving his face dark and blank.

Suddenly he rose and going to the window, he drew the curtains and looked out intently as if therewere something to see outside except blinding mist.

Did she say anything else? he questioned, not turning his head.

She asked me to take care of little Beau and I said I would, like he was my own boy.

What else?

She saidAshleyshe asked me to look after Ashley, too.

He was silent for a moment and then he laughed softly.

Its convenient to have the first wifes permission, isnt it?

What do you mean?

He turned and even in her confusion she was surprised that there was no mockery in his face.

Nor was there any more interest in it than in the face of a man watching the last act of a none-tooamusingcomedy.

I think my meanings plain enough. Miss Melly is dead. You certainly have all the evidenceyou want to divorce me and you havent enough reputation left for a divorce to hurt you. And youhavent any religion left, so the Church wont matter. ThenAshley and dreams come true withthe blessings of Miss Melly.

Divorce? she cried. No! No! Incoherent for a moment she leaped to her feet and running tohim caught his arm. Oh, youre all wrong! Terribly wrong. I dont want a divorce I Shestopped for she could find no other words.

He put his hand under her chin, quietly turned her face up to the light and looked for an intentmoment into her eyes. She looked up at him, her heart in her eyes, her lips quivering as she tried tospeak. But she could marshal no words because she was trying to find in his face some answeringemotions, some leaping light of hope, of joy. Surely he must know, now! But the smooth darkblankness which had baffled her so often was all that her frantic, searching eyes could find. Hedropped her chin and, turning, walked back to his chair and sprawled tiredly again, his chin on hisbreast, his eyes looking up at her from under black brows in an impersonal speculative way.

She followed him back to his chair, her hands twisting, and stood before him.

You are wrong, she began again, finding words. Rhett tonight, when I knew, I ran every stepof the way home to tell you. Oh, darling, I

You are tired, he said, still watching her. Youd better go to bed.

But I must tell you!

Scarlett, he said heavily, I dont want to hearanything.

But you dont know what Im going to say!

My pet, its written plainly on your face. Something, someone has made you realize that theunfortunate Mr. Wilkes is too large a mouthful of Dead Sea fruit for even you to chew. And thatsame something has suddenly set my charms before you in a new and attractive light, he sighedslightly. And its no use to talk about it.

She drew a sharp surprised breath. Of course, he had always read her easily. Heretofore she hadresented it but now, after the first shock at her own transparency, her heart rose with gladness and relief. He knew, he understood and her task was miraculously made easy. No use to talk about it!

Of course he was bitter at her long neglect, of course he was mistrustful of her sudden turnabout.

She would have to woo him with kindness, convince him with a rich outpouring of love, and whata pleasure it would be to do it!

Darling, Im going to tell you everything, she said, putting her hands on the arm of his chairand leaning down to him. Ive been so wrong, such a stupid fool

Scarlett, dont go on with this. Dont be humble before me. I cant bear it. Leave us somedignity, some reticence to remember out of our marriage. Spare us this last.

She straightened up abruptly. Spare us this last? What did he mean by this last? Last? Thiswas their first, their beginning.

But I will tell you, she began rapidly, as if fearing his hand upon her mouth, silencing her.

Oh, Rhett, I love you so, darling! I must have loved you for years and I was such a fool I didntknow it. Rhett, you must believe me!

He looked at her, standing before him, for a moment, a long look that went to the back of hermind. She saw there was belief in his eyes but little interest. Oh, was he going to be mean, at thisof all times? To torment her, pay her back in her own coin?

Oh, I believe you, he said at last But what of Ashley Wilkes?

Ashley! she said, and made an impatient gesture. II dont believe Ive cared anythingabout him for ages. It waswen, a sort of habit I hung onto from when I was a little girl. Rhett, Idnever even thought I cared about him if Id ever known what he was really like. Hes such ahelpless, poor-spirited creature, for all his prattle about truth and honor and

No, said Rhett. If you must see him as he really is, see him straight. Hes only a gentlemancaught in a world he doesnt belong in, trying to make a poor best of it by the rules of the worldthats gone.

Oh, Rhett, dont lets talk of him! What does he matter now? Arent you glad to know Imean, now that I

As his tired eyes met hers, she broke off in embarrassment, shy as a girl with her first beau. Ifhed only make it easier for her! If only he would hold out his arms, so she could crawl thankfullyinto his lap and lay her head on his chest. Her lips on his could tell him better than all herstumbling words. But as she looked at him, she realized that he was not holding her off just to bemean. He looked drained and as though nothing she had said was of any moment.

Glad? he said. Once I would have thanked God, fasting, to hear you say all this. But, now, itdoesnt matter.

Doesnt matter? What are you talking about? Of course, it matters! Rhett, you do care, dontyou? You must care. Melly said you did.

Well, she was right, as far as she knew. But, Scarlett, did it ever occur to you that even the mostdeathless love could wear out?

She looked at him speechless, her mouth a round O.

Mine wore out, he went on, against Ashley Wilkes and your insane obstinacy that makes youhold on like a bulldog to anything you think you want ... Mine wore out.

But love cant wear out!

Yours for Ashley did.

But I never really loved Ashley!

Then, you certainly gave a good imitation of itup till tonight. Scarlett, Im not upbraidingyou, accusing you, reproaching you. That time has passed. So spare me your defenses and yourexplanations. If you can manage to listen to me for a few minutes without interrupting, I canexplain what I mean. Though God knows, I see no need for explanations. The truths so plain.

She sat down, the harsh gas light falling on her white bewildered face. She looked into the eyesshe knew so welland knew so littlelistened to his quiet voice saying words which at firstmeant nothing. This was the first time he had ever talked to her in this manner, as one human beingto another, talked as other people talked, without flippancy, mockery or riddles.

Did it ever occur to you that I loved you as much as a man can love a woman? Loved you foryears before I finally got you? During the war Id go away and try to forget you, but I couldnt andI always had to come back. After the war I risked arrest, just to come back and find you. I cared somuch I believe I would have killed Frank Kennedy if he hadnt died when he did. I loved you but Icouldnt let you know it. Youre so brutal to those who love you, Scarlett. You take their love andhold it over their heads like a whip.

Out of it all only the fact that he loved her meant anything. At the faint echo of passion in hisvoice, pleasure and excitement crept back into her. She sat, hardly breathing, listening, waiting.

I knew you didnt love me when I married you. I knew about Ashley, you see. But, fool that Iwas, I thought I could make you care. Laugh, if you like, but I wanted to take care of you, to petyou, to give you everything you wanted. I wanted to marry you and protect you and give you a freerein in anything that would make you happyjust as I did Bonnie. Youd had such a struggle,Scarlett No one knew better than I what youd gone through and I wanted you to stop fighting andlet me fight for you. I wanted you to play, like a childfor you were a child, a brave, frightened,bullheaded child. I think you are still a child. No one but a child could be so headstrong and soinsensitive.

His voice was calm and tired but there was something in the quality of it that raised a ghost ofmemory in Scarlett. She had heard a voice like this once before and at some other crisis of her life.

Where had it been? The voice of a man facing himself and his world without feeling, withoutflinching, without hope.

Whywhyit had been Ashley in the wintry, windswept orchard at Tara, talking of life andshadow shows with a tired calmness that had more finality in its timbre than any desperatebitterness could have revealed. Even as Ashleys voice then had turned her cold with dread ofthings she could not understand, so now Rhetts voice made her heart sink. His voice, his manner,more than the content of his words, disturbed her, made her realize that her pleasurable excitementof a few moments ago had been untimely. Something was wrong, badly wrong. What it was shedid not know but she listened desperately, her eyes on his brown face, hoping to hear words that would dissipate her fears.

It was so obvious that we were meant for each other. So obvious that I was the only man ofyour acquaintance who could love you after knowing you as you really arehard and greedy andunscrupulous, like me. I loved you and I took the chance. I thought Ashley would fade out of yourmind. But, he shrugged, I tried everything I knew and nothing worked. And I loved you so,Scarlett. If you had only let me, I could have loved you as gently and as tenderly as ever a manloved a woman. But I couldnt let you know, for I knew youd think me weak and try to use mylove against me. And alwaysalways there was Ashley. It drove me crazy. I couldnt sit across thetable from you every night, knowing you wished Ashley was sitting there in my place. And Icouldnt hold you in my arms at night and know thatwell, it doesnt matter now. I wonder, now,why it hurt. Thats what drove me to Belle. There is a certain swinish comfort in being with awoman who loves you utterly and respects you for being a fine gentlemaneven if she is anilliterate whore. It soothed my vanity. Youve never been very soothing, my dear.

Oh, Rhett ... she began, miserable at the very mention of Belles name, but he waved her tosilence and went on.

And then, that night when I carried you upstairsI thoughtI hopedI hoped so much I wasafraid to face you the next morning, for fear Id been mistaken and you didnt love me. I was soafraid youd laugh at me I went off and got drunk. And when I came back, I was shaking in myboots and if you had come even halfway to meet me, had given me some sign, I think Id havekissed your feet. But you didnt.

Oh, but Rhett, I did want you then but you were so nasty! I did want you! I thinkyes, thatmust have been when I first knew I cared about you. AshleyI never was happy about Ashleyafter that, but you were so nasty that I

Oh, well, he said. It seems weve been at cross purposes, doesnt it? But it doesnt matternow. Im only telling you, so you wont ever wonder about it all. When you were sick and it wasall my fault, I stood outside your door, hoping youd call for me, but you didnt, and then I knewwhat a fool Id been and that it was all over.

He stopped and looked through her and beyond her, even as Ashley had often done, seeingsomething she could not see. And she could only stare speechless at his brooding face.

But then, there was Bonnie and I saw that everything wasnt over, after all. I liked to think thatBonnie was you, a little girl again, before the war and poverty had done things to you. She was solike you, so willful, so brave and gay and full of high spirits, and I could pet her and spoil herjust as I wanted to pet you. But she wasnt like youshe loved me. It was a blessing that I couldtake the love you didnt want and give it to her ... When she went, she took everything.

Suddenly she was sorry for him, sorry with a completeness that wiped out her own grief and herfear of what his words might mean. It was the first time in her life she had been sorry for anyonewithout feeling contemptuous as well, because it was the first time she had ever approachedunderstanding any other human being. And she could understand his shrewd caginess, so like herown, his obstinate pride that kept him from admitting his love for fear of a rebuff.

Ah, darling, she said coming forward, hoping he would put out his arms and draw her to his knees. Darling, Im so sorry but Ill make it all up to you! We can be so happy, now that we knowthe truth andRhettlook at me, Rhett! Therethere can be other babiesnot like Bonnie but

Thank you, no, said Rhett, as if he were refusing a piece of bread. Ill not risk my heart athird time.

Rhett, dont say such things! Oh, what can I say to make you understand? Ive told you howsorry I am

My darling, youre such a child. You think that by saying, Im sorry, all the errors and hurts ofyears past can be remedied, obliterated from the mind, all the poison drawn from old wounds. ...

Take my handkerchief, Scarlett. Never, at any crisis of your life, have I known you to have ahandkerchief.

She took the handkerchief, blew her nose and sat down. It was obvious that he was not going totake her in his arms. It was beginning to be obvious that all his talk about loving her meantnothing. It was a tale of a time long past and he was looking at it as though it had never happenedto him. And that was frightening. He looked at her in an almost kindly way, speculation in his eyes.

How old are you, my dear? You never would tell me.

Twenty-eight, she answered dully, muffled in the handkerchief.

Thats not a vast age. Its a young age to have gained the whole world and lost your own soul,isnt it? Dont look frightened. Im not referring to hell fire to come for your affair with Ashley.

Im merely speaking metaphorically. Ever since Ive known you, youve wanted two things.

Ashley and to be rich enough to tell the world to go to hell. Well, you are rich enough and youvespoken sharply to the world and youve got Ashley, if you want him. But all that doesnt seem tobe enough now.

She was frightened but not at the thought of hell fire. She was thinking: But Rhett is my souland Im losing him. And if I lose him, nothing else matters! No, not friends or money ororanything. If only I had him I wouldnt even mind being poor again. No, I wouldnt mind beingcold again or even hungry. But he cant mean Oh, he cant!

She wiped her eyes and said desperately:

Rhett, if you once loved me so much, there must be something left for me.

Out of it all I find only two things that remain and they are the two things you hate the mostpity and an odd feeling of kindness.

Pity! Kindness! Oh, my God, she thought despairingly. Anything hut pity and kindness.

Whenever she felt these two emotions for anyone, they went hand in hand with contempt Was hecontemptuous of her too? Anything would be preferable to that. Even the cynical coolness of thewar days, the drunken madness that drove him the night he carried her up the stairs, his hardfingers bruising her body, or the barbed drawling words that she now realized had covered a bitterlove. Anything except this impersonal kindness that was written so plainly in his face.

Thenthen you mean Ive ruined it allthat you dont love me any more?

Thats right.

But, she said stubbornly, like a child who still feels that to state a desire is to gain that desire,but I love you!

Thats your misfortune.

She looked up quickly to see if there was a jeer behind those words but there was none. He wassimply stating a fact. But it was a fact she still would not believecould not believe. She looked athim with slanting eyes that burned with a desperate obstinacy and the sudden hard line of jaw thatsprang out through her soft cheek was Geralds jaw.

Dont be a fool, Rhett! I can make

He flung up a hand in mock horror and his black brows went up in the old sardonic crescents.

Dont look so determined, Scarlett! You frighten me. I see you are contemplating the transfer ofyour tempestuous affections from Ashley to me and I fear for my liberty and my peace of mind.

No, Scarlett, I will not be pursued as the luckless Ashley was pursued. Besides, I am going away.

Her jaw trembled before she clenched her teeth to steady it. Go away? No, anything but that!

How could life go on without him? Everyone had gone from her, everyone who mattered exceptRhett. He couldnt go. But how could she stop him? She was powerless against his cool mind, hisdisinterested words.

I am going away. I intended to tell you when you came home from Marietta.

You are deserting me?

Dont be the neglected, dramatic wife, Scarlett. The role isnt becoming. I take it, then, you donot want a divorce or even a separation? Well, then, Ill come back often enough to keep gossipdown.

Damn gossip! she said fiercely. Its you I want. Take me with you!

No, he said, and there was finality in his voice. For a moment she was on the verge of anoutburst of childish wild tears. She could have thrown herself on the floor, cursed and screamedand drummed her heels. But some remnant of pride, of common sense stiffened her. She thought, ifI did, hed only laugh, or just look at me. I mustnt bawl; I mustnt beg. I mustnt do anything torisk his contempt. He must respect me eveneven if he doesnt love me.

She lifted her chin and managed to ask quietly:

Where will you go?

There was a faint gleam of admiration in his eyes as he answered.

Perhaps to Englandor to Paris. Perhaps to Charleston to try to make peace with my people.

But you hate them! Ive heard you laugh at them so often and

He shrugged.

I still laughbut Ive reached the end of roaming, Scarlett Im forty-fivethe age when a manbegins to value some of the things hes thrown away so lightly in youth, the clannishness of families, honor and security, roots that go deep Oh, not Im not recanting, Im not regrettinganything Ive ever done. Ive had a hell of a good timesuch a hell of a good time that its begunto pall and now I want something different. No, I never intend to change more than my spots. But Iwant the outer semblance of the things I used to know, the utter boredom of respectabilityotherpeoples respectability, my pet, not my ownthe calm dignity life can have when its lived bygentle folks, the genial grace of days that are gone. When I lived those days I didnt realize theslow charm of them

Again Scarlett was back in the windy orchard of Tara and there was the same look in Rhettseyes that had been in Ashleys eyes that day. Ashleys words were as clear in her ears as though heand not Rhett were speaking. Fragments of words came back to her and she quoted parrot-like: Aglamour to ita perfection, a symmetry like Grecian art.

Rhett said sharply: Why did you say that? Thats what I meant.

It was something thatthat Ashley said once, about the old days.

He shrugged and the light went out of his eyes.

Always Ashley, he said and was silent for a moment.

Scarlett, when you are forty-five, perhaps you will know what Im talking about and thenperhaps you, too, will be tired of imitation gentry and shoddy manners and cheap emotions. But Idoubt it. I think youll always be more attracted by glister than by gold. Anyway, I cant wait thatlong to see. And I have no desire to wait. It just doesnt interest me. Im going to hunt in old townsand old countries where some of the old times must still linger. Im that sentimental. Atlantas tooraw for me, too new.

Stop, she said suddenly. She had hardly heard anything he had said. Certainly her mind hadnot taken it in. But she knew she could no longer endure with any fortitude the sound of his voicewhen there was no love in itHe paused and looked at her quizzically.

Well, you get my meaning, dont you? he questioned, rising to his feet.

She threw out her hands to him, palms up, in the age-old gesture of appeal and her heart, again,was in her face.

No, she cried. All I know is that you do not love me and you are going away! Oh, mydarling, if you go, what shall I do?

For a moment he hesitated as if debating whether a kind lie were kinder in the long run than thetruth. Then he shrugged.

Scarlett, I was never one to patiently pick up broken fragments and glue them together and tellmyself that the mended whole was as good as new. What is broken is brokenand Id ratherremember it as it was at its best than mend it and see the broken places as long as I lived. Perhaps,if I were younger he sighed. But Im too old to believe in such sentimentalities as clean slatesand starting all over. Im too old to shoulder the burden of constant lies that go with living in politedisillusionment. I couldnt live with you and lie to you and I certainly couldnt lie to myself. I canteven lie to you now. I wish I could care what you do or where you go, but I cant.

He drew a short breath and said lightly but softly:

My dear, I dont give a damn.

.

She silently watched him go up the stairs, feeling that she would strangle at the pain in herthroat. With the sound of his feet dying away in the upper hall was dying the last thing in the worldthat mattered. She knew now that there was no appeal of emotion or reason which would turn thatcool brain from its verdict. She knew now that he had meant every word he said, lightly thoughsome of them had been spoken. She knew because she sensed in him something strong, unyielding,implacableall the qualities she had looked for in Ashley and never found.

She had never understood either of the men she had loved and so she had lost them both. Now,she had a fumbling knowledge that, had she ever understood Ashley, she would never have lovedhim; had she ever understood Rhett, she would never have lost him. She wondered forlornly if shehad ever really understood anyone in the world.

There was a merciful dullness in her mind now, a dullness that she knew from long experiencewould soon give way to sharp pain, even as severed tissues, shocked by the surgeons knife, have abrief instant of insensibility before their agony begins.

I wont think of it now, she thought grimly, summoning up her old charm. Ill go crazy if Ithink about losing him now. Ill think of it tomorrow.

But, cried her heart, casting aside the charm and beginning to ache, I cant let him go! Theremust be some way!

I wont think of it now, she said again, aloud, trying to push her misery to the back of hermind, trying to find some bulwark against the rising tide of pain. Illwhy, Ill go home to Taratomorrow, and her spirits lifted faintly.

She had gone back to Tara once in fear and defeat and she had emerged from its sheltering wallsstrong and armed for victory. What she had done once, somehowplease God, she could do again!

How, she did not know. She did not want to think of that now. All she wanted was a breathingspace in which to hurt, a quiet place to lick her wounds, a haven in which to plan her campaign.

She thought of Tara and it was as if a gentle cool hand were stealing over her heart. She could seethe white house gleaming welcome to her through the reddening autumn leaves, feel the quiet hushof the country twilight coming down over her like a benediction, feel the dews falling on the acresof green bushes starred with fleecy white, see the raw color of the red earth and the dismal darkbeauty of the pines on the rolling hills.

She felt vaguely comforted, strengthened by the picture, and some of her hurt and frantic regretwas pushed from the top of her mind. She stood for a moment remembering small things, theavenue of dark cedars leading to Tara, the banks of cape jessamine bushes, vivid green against thewhite walls, the fluttering white curtains. And Mammy would be there. Suddenly she wantedMammy desperately, as she had wanted her when she was a little girl, wanted the broad bosom onwhich to lay her head, the gnarled black hand on her hair. Mammy, the last link with the old days.

With the spirit of her people who would not know defeat, even when it stared them in the face,she raised her chin. She could get Rhett back. She knew she could. There had never been a manshe couldnt get, once she set her mind upon him.

Ill think of it all tomorrow, at Tara. I can stand it then. Tomorrow, Ill think of some way to gethim back. After all, tomorrow is another day.

----

----

""

""

""""----"

"----

"--------

""""--------""----"

--------'----'"

"

"--------"

""

----"""""

--------"

""----"""""""----"""

""----"

"""

""

"

"""------------"""

--------"

"""

""

""

----

"

"

--------"

--------

----""--------""

------------"------------"""""

--------"----

""--------------------"""

----

''"

""

--------""----"""----

--------""----"

----

----

"

""""----

--------"

----------------------------"

----""----

"
